The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of a Bear, by Alfred Elwes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Adventures of a Bear
       And a Great Bear too

Author: Alfred Elwes

Illustrator: Harrison Weir

Release Date: May 3, 2009 [EBook #28671]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF A BEAR ***




Produced by David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)








[Illustration: BEARS AND BROTHERS.]

  THE

  ADVENTURES OF A BEAR

  AND

  A GREAT BEAR TOO

  By ALFRED ELWES

  WITH NINE ILLUSTRATIONS BY HARRISON WEIR.

  LONDON:

  ADDEY AND CO. 21 OLD BOND STREET.

  MDCCCLIII.

  LONDON:

  Printed by G. BARCLAY, Castle St. Leicester Sq.




CONTENTS.

                          PAGE

  AT HOME                    1

  UPON HIS TRAVELS          10

  TOWN LIFE                 19

  PROSPERITY                35

  REVERSES                  44

  PROGRESS                  56

  DOWN HILL                 66

  AT REST                   74


ILLUSTRATIONS.

                          PAGE

  BEARS AND BROTHERS         8

  A CLOSE EMBRACE           17

  MAKING AN IMPRESSION      31

  A VERY GREAT BEAR         43

  THREE THROWS A-PENNY      54

  SELLING THE NATIVES       63

  CHEAP HARMONY             69

  THE LAST LEAD             83

  TAILPIECE                 84




AT HOME.


Yes, it is an "at home" to which I am going to introduce you; but not
the at-home that many of you--I hope _all_ of you--have learnt to love,
but the at-home of a bear. No carpeted rooms, no warm curtains, no
glowing fireside, no pictures, no sofas, no tables, no chairs; no music,
no books; no agreeable, cosy chat; no anything half so pleasant: but
soft moss or snow, spreading trees, skies with ever-changing, tinted
clouds, some fun, some rough romps, a good deal of growling, and now and
then a fight. With these points of difference, you may believe the
_at-home_ of a bear is not quite so agreeable a matter as the at-home of
a young gentleman or lady; yet I have no doubt Master Bruin is much more
at his ease in it than he would find himself if he were compelled to
conform to the usages of human society, and behave as a gentleman ought
to do.

But there is a quality that is quite as necessary to adorn one home as
the other, without which the most delightful mansion and the warmest
cavern can never be happy, and with which the simplest cottage and the
meanest den may be truly blest; and that one quality is, good temper. Of
what avail are comforts, or even luxuries, when there is no seasoning of
good temper to enjoy them with? How many deficiencies can there not be
overlooked, when good temper is present to cover them with a veil?
Perhaps you have not yet learnt what a valuable treasure this good
temper is; when you have read the history of my bear, you will be better
able to form an opinion.

I cannot tell you when this bear was born, nor am I quite sure where;
bears are born in so many parts of the world now, that it becomes very
difficult to determine what country heard their first growl, and they
never think to preserve a memorandum of the circumstance. Let it suffice
that our bear was born, that he had a mamma and papa, and some brothers
and sisters; that he lived in a cavern surrounded by trees and bushes;
that he was always a big lump of a bear, invariably wore a brown coat,
and was often out of temper, or rather, was always _in_ temper, only
that temper was a very bad one.

No doubt his parents would have been very willing to cure this terrible
defect, if they had known how; but the fact is, they seemed always too
much absorbed in their own thoughts to attend much to their family. Old
Mr. Bruin would sit in his corner by the hour together sucking his paw;
and his partner, Mrs. Bruin, would sit in her corner sucking her paw;
whilst the little ones, or big ones, for they were growing up fast,
would make themselves into balls and roll about the ground, or bite one
another's ears by way of a joke, or climb up the neighbouring trees to
admire the prospect, and then slip down again, to the imminent
destruction of their clothes; not that a rent or two would have grieved
their mother very much, for she was a great deal too old, and too
ignorant besides, to think of mending them. In all these sports Master
Bruin, the eldest, was ever the foremost; but as certain as he joined in
the romps, so surely were uproar and fighting the consequence. The
reason was clear enough; his temper was so disagreeable, that although
he was quite ready to play off his jokes on others, he could never bear
to receive them in return; and being, besides, very fierce and strong,
he came at length to be considered as the most unbearable bear that the
forest had known for many generations, and in his own family was looked
on as quite a bug-bear.

Now I privately think, that if a good oaken stick had been applied to
his shoulders, or any other sensitive part of his body, whenever he
displayed these fits of spleen, the exercise would have had a very
beneficial effect on his disposition; but his father, on such occasions,
only uttered his opinion in so low a growl that it was impossible to
make out what he said, and then sucked his paw more vigorously than
ever; and his mother was much too tender-hearted to think of mending his
manners in so rude a way: so Master Bruin grew apace, until his brothers
and sisters were wicked enough to wish he might some day go out for a
walk and forget to come home again, or that he might be persuaded by a
kind friend to emigrate, without going through the ceremony of taking
leave of his family.

It began to be conjectured that some such event had occurred when, for
three whole days, he never made his appearance. The respectable family
of the Bruins were puzzled, but calm, notwithstanding, at this unusual
absence; it evidently made them thoughtful, though it was impossible to
guess what they thought about: if one could form an idea from the
attitudes of the different members, each of whom sat in a corner sucking
his right paw and his left paw alternately--it was a family habit, you
must know--I should say their thoughts were too deep for expression; but
before their meditations were converted from uncertainty into mourning,
the object of them made his appearance at the entrance of the cavern,
with his coat torn, limping in his gait, and with an ugly wound in his
head, looking altogether as disconsolate a brute as you can well
conceive. He did not condescend to say where he had been, nor what he
had been doing; perhaps no one made the inquiry: but it was very evident
he had been doing no good, and had got his reward accordingly. If,
however, this great bear's ill temper was remarkable before, judge what
it must have been with such a sore head!

The experience of mankind has led to the opinion, that there are few
more disagreeable beings in creation than ill-nurtured bears,--bears
that have been ill-licked,--those great, fierce, sullen, cross-grained
and ill-tempered beasts, that are, unhappily, to be found in every part
of this various world; but when all these unhandsome qualities are found
in one individual of the species, and that one happens to have a sore
head into the bargain, it is easy to believe the _at home_ which he
honours or dishonours with his presence can neither be very quiet nor
particularly comfortable.

Habit makes many things supportable which at first would seem beyond our
powers of endurance. Mr. and Mrs. B., and, indeed, all the other B.'s,
male and female, had got so used to the tyranny of this ill-tempered
animal, that they put up with his moroseness almost without a growl; but
there is a limit to sufferance, beyond which neither men nor bears can
travel, and that boundary was at last attained with the B.'s. As what I
am now about to relate is, however, rather an important fact in my
biography, I must inform you how the matter occurred, and what were the
circumstances which led to it.

You are, perhaps, aware that bears, being of rather an indolent
disposition, are not accustomed to hoard up a store of provision for
their wants in winter, but prefer--in their own country, at
least--sleeping through the short dreary days and long bitter nights,
and thus avoid the necessity of taking food for some weeks, although
they grow very thin during their lengthened slumbers. I forget what this
time is called in bears' language, but we give it the name of
hybernation. Now it happened that Mrs. Bruin had taken it into her head
to lay by this winter a nice little stock, which she very carefully
buried at a short distance from the mouth of the cavern, when she felt
the usual drowsiness of the season coming on, and having covered the
spot with a heap of dead leaves that she might know it again when she
woke up, she crawled into bed, and turning her back to her old partner,
who was already in a comfortable state of forgetfulness, went fast
asleep.

The whole family rather overslept themselves, for the sun was quite
brilliant when they awoke, and it was very evident that they had been
dozing away for some months. The ill-tempered bear was the first on his
legs, and kicking his two nearest brothers as he got up, just to hint to
them that he was awake again, he opened his mouth to its whole
extent--and a very great extent it was, too--and stretching his limbs
one after another, and giving himself a hearty shake instead of washing,
shaving, and combing, he scuffled to the entrance of the cavern and
sniffed at the fresh air. He sniffed and sniffed, and the more he
sniffed, the more certainly did his nose whisper that there was
something else besides fresh air which he was inhaling. The smell of the
fresh air, too, or the _something else_, caused him a tremendous
appetite, which was every moment becoming greater; and then it entered
his bearish brain that where there was a smell there must be something
to occasion it. Whereupon, following that great nose of his--and he
could not have had a better guide--he scuffled out of the cavern and
down the path, till he reached a little mound of earth and leaves,
where, the odour being strongest, he squatted down. With his great paws
he soon demolished the entrance to his mamma's larder, and lost no time
in pulling out some of the dainties it contained, which, without more
ado, he set about devouring. Meanwhile his brothers, who had been
aroused by the affectionate conduct of the eldest, were by this time
also wide awake, and had quite as good appetites as Bruin himself; and
though on ordinary occasions they stood in great awe of that most
ill-tempered brute, it must be admitted that this was an
_extra_-ordinary occasion, and they acted accordingly. Just fancy being
months without anything to eat, and having appetites fierce enough to
devour one another!

So they rushed to the spot where Bruin was making so excellent a meal,
and without any other apology than a short grunt or two, they seized
upon some of the hidden treasures, and with little ceremony crammed them
into their hungry jaws. Bruin was thunderstruck! Never before had they
ever presumed to dip their paws into his dish, and now they were
actually before his face, converting the most delicate morsels to their
own use, and, as it were, taking the food out of his very mouth! After
an internal struggle of a few seconds, during which it seemed doubtful
whether his emotions or his greediness in filling his jaws so full would
choke him, he uttered a savage growl, and, with one stroke of his huge
paw, felled his younger brother to the ground. Then turning to the
second, he flew at him like a fury, and seemed resolved to make him
share a similar fate; but the other, who was not wanting in courage, and
who was strengthened by the idea that there was something still in the
larder worth fighting for, and which he would certainly lose if he ran
away, warded off his blows, and, by careful management, now dodging, now
striking, kept his brother at bay, and avoided coming to such close
quarters as to subject himself to Bruin's hug: for he knew, if he once
felt that embrace, there was not much chance of his having any appetite
left with which to complete his half-finished breakfast.

The noise of the combat had now, however, roused the family. Mrs. B. was
the first to make her appearance, and she was soon followed by the rest.
Explanations ensued, although the facts of the case were sufficiently
clear, and Bruin's character was well known. Old Ursus Major drew
himself up, and, for once in his life, assumed a dignified demeanour.
The ill-tempered bear stood abashed before his parents, although he
moved his head to and fro in an obstinate manner, as though rejecting
all interference.

It is a pity I cannot relate to you what was said upon this occasion,
for Old Bruin is reported to have made a very eloquent discourse on the
horrible effects of ill-temper and greediness; and good advice is worth
having, whether uttered by a bear or any other animal. Suffice it, that
after lecturing his son on the enormity of his offences,--which probably
he was himself partly the cause of, through not punishing many of his
previous errors,--he bid him quit for ever his paternal roof, and seek
his fortune elsewhere; cautioning him at the same time, that if he ever
expected to get through the world with credit to his name, and even
comfort to his person, he must be honest, good-tempered, and forbearing.

Bruin took this advice in most ungracious part; and without exchanging a
word with any of the family, although it was evident his poor old mother
longed to hug him in her arms, he growled out some unintelligible words,
and set forth upon his travels.




UPON HIS TRAVELS.


There is no denying that when Bruin had got clear of the old familiar
path, and lost sight of the dwelling where he had hitherto spent his
days, he felt most particularly uncomfortable; and if he had had the
power of recalling the past, he would, in his present state of feeling,
no doubt have done so. For the first time in his life, the sense of his
ill-temper struck him in all its ugliness; and as he sat down on a huge
tree which was lying across his road, he looked such a picture of
disconsolateness, that it was evident he would have felt great relief if
he could have shed some tears. Alas, how much does Bruin's condition
remind us of little scenes among ourselves! We give way to our bad
tempers and our selfishness; we make ourselves disagreeable, and our
friends unhappy; we quarrel, if we do not actually fight; and when we
meet the reward of our waywardness, and find ourselves abandoned by
those who would have loved us had we acted differently, we then moan
over our fate, and bitterly regret what we might have avoided. Alas,
poor human nature! alas, poor bear!

I am truly sorry to observe that no act of repentance followed Bruin's
sense of desolation. His first feeling of sorrow over, he felt indignant
that he should have been so treated; but, more than that, as he was
still hungry, he felt regret at being denied a closer search into his
old mother's larder.

Whilst engaged in his various reflections he happened to cast his eyes
up to a neighbouring hollow tree, where, at some height from the ground,
a number of bees were flying in and out a great hole, with all the
bustle and buzzing usual to those busy people. Now, it is well known
that bears are mightily fond of honey, and will run great risks in order
to obtain this dainty, and Bruin was very far from being an exception to
his tribe. He was too ignorant to reflect that it was a great deal too
early in the season to hope for any store, but, consulting only his own
inclinations, he lost no time in climbing up the tree; and when he had
reached the spot where the now angry bees were hurrying to and fro more
vigorously than ever, he thrust his great paw into a hole with the hope
of drawing forth a famous booty. But the indignant insects now came out
in a swarm, and attacked him with the utmost fury; three of them settled
on his nose, and pricked him most unmercifully; a dozen or two planted
themselves on a great patch behind, where his trousers were worn thin;
and a whole troop fastened on to the sore place in his head--for it was
not quite healed up--and so stung him, that, roaring with pain and rage,
he threw himself, rather than descended, from the tree, and went flying
through the wood to get rid of his determined little enemies: they stuck
fast, however, to their points of attack, nor did Bruin get clear of his
tormentors till he dashed himself into a pool of water and buried his
head for a moment or two under the surface.

It was with some degree of trepidation that he raised his nose above
water and peeped about him; the bees were all gone, so he crawled out of
the mud, and after an angry shake or two, for his coat was quite wet, he
resumed his journey.

Bruin now travelled on till noon; and what with hunger and his long
walk, you may believe his temper was not improved. A rustling noise on
the left, accompanied every now and then with a short, contented kind of
grunt, attracted his attention, and looking through some brambles, he
descried in an open space a very large boar, with two most formidable
tusks protruding from his jaws, busily engaged in rooting up the ground,
from which he had extracted a curious variety of roots and other
edibles, the sight of which made Bruin's mouth water. For the first time
in his life he felt the necessity of civility; for though he had never
made any personal acquaintance with the tribe to which the animal
before him belonged, there were many tales current in his family of
their ferocity when provoked; and the few reasoning powers he possessed
were sufficient to assure him, that not even his rough paws or burly
strength would secure him from those glistening tusks if directed
angrily against him. So Bruin resolved to try and be civil; and with
this determination walked into the stranger's domain, and accosted him
in as polite a way as his rude nature would permit him to assume.

The animal, who was known in his neighbourhood as Wylde Boare, Esquire,
on account of the extent of his property, received Bruin's advances with
great caution, for he was naturally of a suspicious temper, his bright
reddish eyes twinkling in a very unpleasant manner; perceiving, however,
that his unexpected visitor was but a mere youngster, and that he looked
very hungry and tired, he grunted out a surly sort of welcome, and,
jerking his snout in the direction of the heap of provisions, bade him
squat down and make a meal. Bruin did not wait for a second invitation,
but, stretching out his huge legs, picked up the fresh vegetables, which
he thrust into his capacious jaws with every appearance of relish.

When his repast came to an end--and this did not happen till there was
an end of the food--he wiped his mouth with the back of his arm, and
looked at the boar; and the boar, who had said nothing during the
disappearance of the fruits of his morning's work, but had contented
himself with uttering a grunt or two, looked at Bruin. At length he
observed,----

"Hurgh, you have a famous appetite!"

"Ah," answered the bear, "and so would you, if you had not eaten
anything for the last few weeks!"

After a pause:----

"Hurgh, hurgh!" said Mr. Boare, in a guttural voice; "I never tried; but
a big fellow like you ought to be able to get through a deal of work."

"Perhaps so," observed the surly bear; "but I don't intend to make the
experiment."

After another pause:----

"Hurgh, an idle fellow, I'm afraid!" said Mr. Boare, half aside; "and
not quite so civil as before his breakfast." Then he exclaimed aloud,
"I suppose you will make no objection to help me dig up some more food,
seeing that you have made away with my dinner, hurgh?"

"Who do you take me for?" said the ungrateful beast, springing to his
legs, and eyeing his entertainer with one of his furious looks.

"Who do I take you for, hurgh, you graceless cub?" exclaimed Mr. Boare,
in a rage, for he was rather hasty in his manner, and his red eyes
twinkled, and his back began to get up in a way which showed his
agitation; "who do I take you for? Why, I did take you for one who would
be at least thankful for food given you when almost starving: but I now
perceive you are only an ugly lump of a bear. Out of my sight this
instant, or, from want of my own dinner, which you have devoured, I
shall, perchance, make a meal of you!--hurgh, hurgh!"

As he said these words the bristles on his back started up so furiously,
and his tusks glistened so horridly in a little ray of sunlight, which
was peeping in to see what was the matter, that Master Bruin felt
thoroughly frightened, and made a precipitate retreat, turning round at
every few steps to observe whether he were followed, and if it would be
necessary to take refuge in one of the trees; but Wylde Boare, Esq. only
grunted out his favourite expression, which, in this case, was mixed
with a great deal of contempt, and recommenced digging for his dinner as
if nothing had occurred to disturb his usual contented state of mind.

Bruin now travelled on till he reached a stream, which came bounding
through this part of the wood at a very rapid pace, and making a
terrible fuss because sundry large stones in the middle of its course
rather impeded its progress. The noise it made, and the anger it showed,
seemed to please our sulky bear mightily, so he sat down on the bank
with his toes in the water to enjoy the spectacle. The scene was a very
striking one, and was fitted to charm the most indifferent eye; and
Bruin, bear as he was, could not help being attracted by it. Whatever
his meditations, however, it was not destined that he should pursue them
long without interruption; for his quick ear soon detected the sharp,
quick bark of several dogs--a sound that was carried along by a breeze
which swept by him at intervals. He raised his head with his huge nose
in the air to sniff out any possible danger, and did not seem at all
pleased with the result of his observations; for he drew first one foot
and then the other out of the water, and raised himself to his full
height. As he did so, a more than usual commotion in the stream drew his
attention, when he perceived the round head of a large otter appear
above the surface, whilst two bright eyes gave a hasty look all round.
On observing Bruin, the head immediately disappeared, and at the same
moment a whole pack of terriers, in hot haste, came sweeping round a
bank hard by, but stopped short on finding themselves in presence of
such a formidable creature.

Bruin perceived that he had made an impression, and his usual insolence
returned; for he had at first been startled, and he attributed the pause
of the terriers to fear, when, in fact, it was only the result of
surprise. If he had been a little better physiognomist, he would have
observed a certain air of determination about the little fellows, which
sufficiently showed that it was prudence or a sense of duty which stayed
them, and not a lack of courage: they had been sent out to procure an
otter, and they were now deliberating among themselves whether it
would be wise to spend their time in quarrelling with a bear.

[Illustration: A CLOSE EMBRACE.]

After a short consultation, one who appeared to have the guidance of the
pack uttered a decided little bark, and turning a little aside,
endeavoured to pass between Bruin and the stream, but sufficiently near
to show that he was not afraid to come into contact with him, followed
by his companions. This evidently contemptuous mode of treating him,
aroused all our ill-tempered hero's bad humour; so, without considering
the consequences of the action, he raised his big paw and knocked the
leader down. The sturdy little fellows wanted no further provocation; as
if influenced by a single will, they turned upon him, and attacked him
in front, flank, and rear, with an impetuosity which was at first
irresistible, because unexpected. Finding that those behind him were his
greatest and most successful tormentors, he very prudently sat himself
down, crushing one or two of them in his descent; then springing to his
legs, and as he did so catching several more in his arms, he hugged them
till they had no more breath in their bodies, when he dropped them, and
took up a fresh supply. One of the pack, however, more alert than his
fellows, sprang up and seized him by the nose, making his teeth meet in
that prominent feature, and caused Bruin such intense pain, that,
forgetting all his strategy, he tried to beat down his determined little
foe with his paws, and ran off howling in a most terrific manner,
pursued by the remainder of the pack, who bit at his hind legs, tore his
already ragged coat till it hung in ribbons; and when Bruin, who, having
at length got rid of the bold little fellow that had fastened to his
nose, climbed up a tree, they stood yelping at the foot of it, till
evening had completely set in, when they slowly retired.

And what were our ill-natured hero's thoughts, as he sat upon an
elevated branch, and gently rubbed his wounded snout? Why, unfortunately
for his own happiness, he laid the blame of his mishap on any one or any
thing, rather than the right being or circumstance. It was the otter's
fault, or the dogs' fault--those dogs were always so quarrelsome; or it
was his father's fault in driving him away from home: in fact, every one
was in error rather than himself and his own disagreeable disposition.
And here we may observe, that they are such characters as Bruin who
bring disrepute on a whole tribe; for we are too apt to form our
opinions of a nation by the few individuals we may happen to fall in
with, although, probably, no conclusions can be falser. Let us,
therefore, be careful ere we form our judgments, and let us not believe
that all Bruin's kindred and compatriots were sulky and ill-tempered
because he himself was such a disagreeable lump of a bear.




TOWN LIFE.


Bruin woke up next morning with so uncomfortable a feeling of soreness
from the rough treatment he had received, that it was with some
difficulty he was enabled to move his heavy limbs; and he found sitting
so unpleasant a posture, that he lay stretched across two or three
branches for several hours, and in a very ill-humour, indeed, watched
the activity displayed beneath and around him. Now a stealthy fox, upon
some foraging expedition, would come creeping along, his foot-fall
scarcely heard on the withered leaves and dead branches; now a timid
mouse would leap nimbly by, and, at the least signal of danger, would
disappear as if by enchantment; then a frolicsome squirrel, vaulting as
fearlessly from bough to bough as if he were not fifty feet from the
ground, would arouse him for a minute from his sulky mood, and light up
his fierce eye with an expression of interest which it was very clear
had no higher source than a hope that the little tumbler might fall down
and break his neck, for daring to be in such a good humour. But the
birds, above all, excited his anger; for seeing them flying about gaily
in the sun, which tinged the tops of the trees so gloriously, Bruin
actually growled with indignation--a sound which nearly caused that
accident to Master Squirrel that our ungracious hero had desired for
him, so terribly was he frightened.

A few days thus spent sufficiently recovered him to render him capable
of moving, when he descended from his temporary hospital, and, with the
aid of a thick staff, which he had provided himself for the purpose, set
off once more, supplying his wants in the way of food with such edibles
as fell in his way, a bear not being remarkably particular concerning
its quality or kind. One only thought now possessed him,--that of
quitting the wooded ground where his life had hitherto been passed, and
reaching one of those spots where, as he had heard his parents relate,
animals of various kinds congregate together, and live in habitations
raised by their own ingenuity; in fact, a city.

"At least," he thought, "if what I have heard of such places be true,
and that merit of every kind is certain there to meet its reward, and be
properly appreciated, I shall stand a better chance than my neighbours."
With this reflection, he shuffled on a little quicker; and the reader,
who has been thus allowed a private view of his motives, will observe
that modesty was not among Bruin's list of virtues.

After a day's march, with sundry restings by the way--for he was not in
good travelling order--he reached the outskirts of the wood; and when he
got beyond it, he stood still to mark the prospect, which was, in sooth,
a very charming one, and the more striking to him as being so entirely
novel. As he stood on a rising ground, the scene lay beneath; and the
sun, which was nearing the horizon, darted his level beams through a
gentle mist that was beginning to rise from the valley, and made a
wondrous golden haze, shedding beauty over every object within its
influence. A silvery brook ran from some distant hills, and, after
numerous windings, spread into a broad pond; then narrowing again, with
an abrupt fall or two, which made its pace the faster, it ran
noiselessly through some green meadows, where cattle and horses were
grazing, then made a bend into the wood, where it was lost to view.
Bruin's quick eye scarcely, however, watched its course, for his whole
attention was rivetted on what to him was of more interest,--the city to
which his weary steps were directed. It stood upon the margin of the
rivulet, just before its waters expanded into the little lake, and
seemed to occupy a considerable extent of ground. It was neither
handsomely nor regularly built, yet it had an imposing effect as a
whole, and in Bruin's eyes seemed to need nothing in the way of
architecture. Its inhabitants, I may observe in passing, were
principally descendants of canine tribes, with a few pussies, who, for
some worldly advantage, had overcome their prejudices to such society;
and a flock or two of birds: as the latter, however, were of a volatile
disposition, and were constantly on the move, they resided principally
in the higher portions of the city, so that they might come and go
without interfering with the steadier habits of the animal population.
Several horses and black cattle resided in the environs, but, with the
exception of a donkey or two, rarely entered the town, for they found
few inducements in the noisy streets to compensate them for the charm
and tranquillity of a rural life.

After contemplating the scene for some time, Bruin slowly descended the
hill, his confidence in his own powers somewhat weakened now he was in
sight of the spot where they were to be called into action; one reason
for this slight depression of his spirits arising, probably, from his
ignorance of the dwellers in the great city, for the intelligence just
communicated to the reader was at that time totally unknown to him. The
strange appearance, also, of every creature he now met, contributed to
abash him; for every one who had any pretensions to respectability wore
over the coats with which nature had provided them, clothes of a cut
that looked wonderful in the eyes of the untutored Bruin. His own aspect
was, meanwhile, not less odd in the opinion of the more civilised
animals. His untrimmed hair and beard, his ragged coat, his queer gait,
and the unrestrained gape of wonder with which he stared around him,
were sufficient to excite the attention of the most indifferent, and it
was with a tolerably large train at his heels that he reached the
entrance to the principal street. Here crowds of well-dressed dogs, both
male and female (the latter always well-attended), were walking about or
idling the time away; town-bred puppies, with insolent stare, were
lounging at every turn, their delicate paws proving how little they were
used to labour. On one side Bruin observed a gracefully-proportioned
white cat, veiled, gliding demurely along, whilst a strong tabby, her
nurse, purred behind, with three little kittens in her arms, mewing to
their hearts' content; and on the other several huge mastiffs, stalking
gravely in a row, like policemen in our London streets going to their
beats, the animals to which they have been compared being bound on a
similar errand.

These various sights proved to Bruin that there must be a different
agency at work to that which existed in his native forest. He was wise
enough to perceive that mere animal force was not likely to succeed
here, or hold the same position as it did in the land where he was born
and had spent his earlier years. The appearances of wealth on one hand,
the evidences of a soldier-like discipline and order on the other,
convinced him that this was no place to vent his ill-humour by an
exhibition of brute strength, for that it was sure to meet more than its
match; whilst the uncertainty of the punishment which would attend such
outbreak, provided it were indulged in, made him resolve, at least, to
put a curb upon his public conduct. This was the first great step in
Bruin's education; a step, alas! merely taught him by his fears. Had it
sprung from higher sources, there would have been a chance of its doing
permanent good; but what solid benefit can be reckoned on or attained
which arises from such a motive?

The attention that the rough stranger from a distant country met with
from the civilised population of Caneville (for that, or something like
it, was the name of the city), was beginning to be rather irksome to
him. Every lady-dog, as she passed him, seemed anxious to allow him
plenty of room; the three kittens in arms, at sight of him set up a
chorus of cries, which their nurse tried in vain to appease; a mastiff,
who was on guard on the opposite side of the way, seemed very much
inclined to interfere for the preservation of public peace; whilst a
couple of puppies, touched off in the extreme of the then prevailing
fashion at Caneville, turned up their noses and their tails in a way
which seemed to render it perfectly marvellous how they kept upon their
legs. All this was sufficiently irritating, even to the most
good-natured of beings, and Bruin found it especially hard to bear; he
was assisted, however, in his prudential resolution to abstain from any
outward exhibition of wrath by a sound which was as new to his ear as it
was exciting to his feelings. It came from the upper end of the street,
where a crowd had assembled; and as every one in his neighbourhood
seemed to think the amusement it promised would be of a more interesting
kind than baiting a bear, and had hastened in the direction whence it
proceeded, Bruin thought he could not do better than follow their
example.

On reaching the spot, his great height enabled him to get a view of what
was going on; and as he pressed forward, the animals with which he came
in contact gladly made way at his approach, so that in a few seconds he
stood in the front row of a large circle, the centre of which was
occupied by a fat, overgrown pig, with an astonishingly long snout, and
a couple of rings through it by way of ornament; two equally long ears,
that had evidently been submitted to some curious operation, for they
were slit in various places, and hung down from his head like uncombed
locks of hair; and a pair of very sharp little eyes, which seemed to
have the unpleasant power of piercing right through you, if in their
incessant wanderings they chanced to catch a look from your own. It was
very evident that this animal, who was quite a _savant_, or, as we
should say, a learned pig, enjoyed a high reputation in the community of
Caneville, where he had been settled some time; and whenever, as now, he
chose to make an outdoor exhibition of himself and his powers, he was
certain of a very full audience.

Behind him stood a punchy little bull-dog, with an inflamed
countenance, evidently caused by too close application to a mouth-organ,
arranged in such a way as to be at a convenient distance from his
capacious muzzle; and before him was a drum, an article on which Bruin
looked with a curious and most ludicrous expression of physiognomy. As
he was now in the foremost van, he gradually edged near and nearer to
the object of his attraction, whilst the learned beast was making
preparations for a grand display; and just as Bruin had reached the
place where the drummer had taken his stand, Herr Schwein (so was he
called) gave orders for a flourish of music by way of opening the
performance. But how describe the effect which the sound produced on our
bear? At the first stroke of the stick on the drum, he leaped from the
ground as if he had been shot; then giving utterance to a prolonged
howl, he began dancing about in a way which would have been irresistibly
funny, if the audience had not been too frightened to stop and witness
it. As it happened, a general panic seized the multitude, and off went
good part of the population of Caneville, howling, screaming, and
yelping to their various homes, where they, of course, each gave a
different version of the story. The learned pig alone, and his faithful
Tom, who would not run away for any body, were the only creatures who
stood their ground; the former, because he had travelled much and was
acquainted with the peculiarities of bears; and the latter, partly for
the reason just given, and in part because he was so fixed to the drum
that to go away without it was impossible; and to go away with it,
without previous packing, would have been equally difficult, so he stood
his ground and watched the proceedings.

On the ceasing of the music and dispersing of the crowd our hero also
stood still, as much surprised as any of the former spectators at the
effect he had produced; and then feeling still more sensibly the effects
of his fatigues, he sat down panting and exhausted. The pig, who had
been quietly watching him, and had evidently been revolving some
interesting thoughts in his contemplative brain, shortly after rose, and
gathering up the things which were to have figured in his evening's
performance, and assisting to pack the drum comfortably on Tom's back,
beckoned to the bear, and waddled gently off in an opposite direction of
the city to that where Bruin had entered. Our interesting brute
hesitated a moment; but being nudged by Tom, who uttered at the same
time a word or two of encouragement, which, to render intelligible, may
be translated by "Come along, stupid!" he mechanically followed this
fast young dog, and they all reached the pig's habitation just as
evening was falling.

After the bear had been regaled with a most hearty supper--for pigs, it
may be remarked by the way, are famous caterers--his learned host
unfolded to him his plans. He explained the nature of his own
avocations; how that he had supported himself, and saved a nice little
store besides, through telling the fortunes and relating the age of the
lady-dogs and doglets of Caneville; and how he performed sundry
conjuring tricks, which, though easy enough when found out, had earned
for him an astonishing reputation among the simple animals of the city,
who never _had_ penetrated the secret. He explained, besides, that there
were many more he could perform if his figure were more slim and his
movements as active as they had been some years ago, before time, by
increasing his rotundity, had lessened the ease of his motions; but that
if Bruin would undertake to learn them, his fortune was as good as made:
for he, Herr Schwein, would not only teach him all he knew, but would
reward him with half the profits derived from his performance, when he
should have mastered his studies. This proposal so jumped with Bruin's
humour, that he consented without further solicitation, and it was
agreed that his engagement should commence from the following day.

With the morning's sun did our hero's lessons begin; and as Nature had
not added stupidity to his various weaknesses, he made really rapid
progress. But poor Piggy found it dreadfully hard work, and more than
once repented his bargain; for though reflection and circumstances had
made him a philosopher, and travelling had taught him experience, it
required all his philosophy and his utmost skill to support the weight
of Bruin's unhandsome temper and prevent an utter breach between them.
Pride, however, and a natural wish to reap the harvest which he had sown
at the cost of so much pains and labour, induced him to persevere, and
the day at length arrived when Bruin was to make his next appearance in
public. Since the first evening of his arrival he had kept strictly
within his employer's grounds, and had familiarised his mind with the
mouth-organ and the drum. But now the sun had risen that was to shine on
him again abroad; he felt considerably elated; the idea of sporting a
handsome pair of silk drawers, and a medal with a ribbon round his neck,
and a silver anklet, contributing not a little to produce the feeling.

The pig, who knew the value of notoriety in such cases, had, from early
morning, kept Tom parading the streets with a large placard over his
shoulders, announcing

                      THE ARRIVAL
                          OF A
                DISTINGUISHED FOREIGNER!
      ENGAGED BY HERR SCHWEIN AT A RUINOUS EXPENSE!!
         FOR A LIMITED NUMBER OF REPRESENTATIONS,
                      TO PERFORM
  HIS EXTRAORDINARY AND INTENSELY INTERESTING FEATS
                      BEFORE THE
            HIGHLY-DISCRIMINATING PUBLIC
                   OF CANEVILLE!!!

The highly-discriminating being thus prepared, assembled in the great
square, the place chosen for the exhibition, long before the appointed
hour. The ladies were arranged in the foremost rank, with a politeness
that was perfectly edifying, whilst knots of fashionable dogs and cats
got as near as possible to the reigning favourites; curs of inferior
degree occupied the outermost ranks, and a bird or two got gallery
places above the heads of the animal spectators. It was when expectation
was raised to that pitch which usually finds vent in the most discordant
cries, that Bruin, carrying a bag, followed by Tom with the drum, made
his appearance,--a sight which caused universal approbation. Some
praised his evident strength, others admired his dress, and some again
criticised his figure; but when he drew out from his bag a quantity of
singular objects, and Tom struck up an extraordinary extempore air with
variations on the pipes, accompanied by sundry vicious blows on the
drum, public curiosity was strained to the utmost.

[Illustration: MAKING AN IMPRESSION.]

When the music ceased, Bruin imperatively waved the spectators back, and
the performance began. He handled a pair of knives in a way which made
the beholders tremble; for those implements were swallowed and appeared
again at the tips of his paws or the end of his nose, without doing him
any injury, and they were forced into his arms and drawn furiously
across his throat without causing the slightest wound; and then they
were tucked into his waistband, and after sundry contortions and leaps,
and affected attitudes, they were pulled from out his capacious jaws,
where they had stuck fast, to the wonder and delight of the spectators.
Then he took up three balls of polished brass, which seemed too heavy
for any fashionable puppy present to lift, and commenced a wonderful
series of exploits with them. Now they leaped a great height into the
air, one after another, with a rapidity which made the crowd's eyes
water; then they ran over his shoulders, and down his back, and between
his legs, and over his shoulders again in a continuous stream; and then
they went bumping over every projecting part of his body, leaping here,
jumping there, now on the top of his head, now on the tip of his nose,
and never falling to the ground, and always going this game with such
wondrous swiftness, as though there were thirty balls instead of three.
But the feat which pleased them most, and which may be called the
crowning effort of the display, was when Bruin balanced a short stick on
his forehead with a pewter plate on the top of it, which, by some
mysterious agency, was made to spin round and round, and dazzle the
optics of the crowd as it glittered in the sun. At this marvellous sight
there was a burst of admiration! Tom blew at his pipes and hammered at
his drum with the utmost energy. Two well-dressed young dogs, who had
been paying particular attention to a tall young lady with a long
sentimental nose, over which a veil dropped gracefully (she was
evidently one of the aristocratic greyhound family), gaped with wonder
as they stared at the whirling pewter; the young lady herself looked on
with a gaze where surprise and admiration were singularly mingled; and
the curs, who are less accustomed to restrain their feelings, gave vent
to them in vigorous howls. The success was, indeed, complete; and when
Tom went round with the plate, a rich harvest amply repaid the pains
which had been bestowed on the rehearsals.




PROSPERITY.


Herr Schwein, that very learned pig, who had stationed himself in an
unobserved corner of the throng, in order that he might witness the
behaviour of his pupil, was delighted, though not astonished, at his
success, and gave vent to his feelings in as marked a manner as a
philosopher and an animal of his peculiar temperament could be expected
to betray. He even went so far as to beg Bruin to embrace him--an
experiment he was not likely to desire repeated, for that malicious
beast gave him so severe a squeeze, as to cause him an indigestion for
several days after. Piggy's calculations, and the joy which he built on
them, would not have been of so solid a kind, if he had known a little
more of Bruin's disposition; but, though an animal of experience and
knowledge of the world, he was in this case too blinded by his pride to
form his usually correct judgment. He only considered what the bear owed
to him in the way of gratitude for clothing, feeding, and civilising; he
grunted with satisfaction as he revolved in his thoughts the goodly
treasure which Bruin might be the means of his acquiring; for,
philosopher and animal of the world as he was, he had not been able to
divest himself of two grand vices,--gluttony and avarice. The former
belonged to his tribe, the latter to himself; and though at first sight
they would seem in contradiction with each other, he managed somehow to
permit, in his own proper person, that both should have equal sway; and
the older he grew, the larger and firmer-rooted did these two passions
become. He was getting also so unwieldy, that indolence was, to a
certain extent, forced upon him; and this was another powerful
consideration which induced him to look on the accession of Bruin as a
real benefit.

Unhappy, however, the lot of that animal who should repose any degree of
confidence in good to be derived from such a temper and disposition! As
day by day developed some new feature which helped to betray a character
singularly unamiable and unattractive, so day by day did Herr Schwein's
habitation resound with growls and grunts of anger, where formerly
reigned the completest calm. Bruin's performances also lacking novelty,
began to pall upon the public taste; and though Tom trudged about with
his placards more vigorously than ever, and wore the soles of his poor
paws thin with the exercise, the novelty was dying out, and the
fashionable puppies began to be witty in their whispered remarks upon
the person of the bearer. The bear had got a great deal too lazy to
learn any fresh exploits; and the pig, indeed, was almost too much out
of spirits to teach them. Besides this, Bruin had acquired habits of
rather an expensive kind, to indulge which required a good deal of
money; and, as Herr Schwein suspected that his due half of the now
diminished receipts was withheld from him, quarrels not unnaturally
ensued.

These various annoyances produced a great change in poor Piggy, who,
perhaps, felt more deeply the overthrow of his pet projects, than the
actual loss his bargain had entailed on him; though the loss itself was
not trifling, for Bruin's enormous appetite, which he indulged to a
frightful extent, went considerably beyond the income that his
diminished exertions produced, and there was a chance, as matters stood,
that this resource would soon fail altogether. It is not surprising,
then, if the Herr should contemplate breaking off his engagement, and
terminating at once the difficulties which seemed to threaten him, by
turning the great bear adrift upon the world. But a stronger power than
a pig's was about to settle the question, a power to which all animals
are equally amenable: and thus was it brought into action.

It was evening; Bruin and Tom, the former in excessively ill-humour, the
latter much as usual, though sulky, returned home, where the Herr
awaited them with impatience. It did not require a very great amount of
sagacity to learn that they had been unsuccessful, for disappointment
was plainly visible on the features of both. From Bruin nothing could be
obtained in the way of information, for he had thrown himself on the
ground, and stuffed his wide jaws with some delicacies Piggy had
reserved for his own supper, so it was to Tom his master's eyes were
directed for an explanation. Now that valuable servant's _fort_, never
lay in making an eloquent discourse, or even in describing the most
ordinary facts in a plain and intelligible manner; and in this instance,
as his feelings interfered with the relation of facts, a tolerably large
stock of patience, and some cleverness to boot, were needed to
understand the account.

This was, after cross-examination, what Herr Schwein managed to
comprehend. They had gone to the marketplace as usual, and, to their
delight, found it crowded, immediately jumping to the conclusion that
the public mind of Caneville was not so utterly degraded as they had
begun to fancy it. The innocent conjecture was soon, however, disabused;
for on their drawing nearer they observed that faithless population
gathered about "ANOTHER DISTINGUISHED FOREIGNER," with a remarkably long
beard and a fierce pair of horns, who proclaimed himself a magician from
beyond the land where the sun rose, and rejoiced in the name of Doctor
Capricornus, A.V.G.T., and M.U.H.S., which the great learning of Herr
Schwein interpreted by A Very Great Traveller, or Thief, and Member of
the Universal Herbage or Humbug Society. Now, the feats displayed by
this new candidate for public favour were of the stupidest order
(remember, this is not the statement of a disinterested party),
consisting merely in pointing out any pebble on the ground that any one
of the crowd should have previously fixed on, and mounting to the top of
a little ladder and balancing himself on the tips of his horns at the
upper round; yet it was enough to excite the enthusiasm of the
lookers-on: nor could all the cries of Bruin, bidding them come and see
what true genius really was; nor all the dulcet notes of Tom, though he
blew at his pipes till he was black in the face, and thrashed his drum
till he beat in its crown, procure them a single spectator. Thoroughly
disgusted, they quitted the spot and returned home, Bruin getting into a
dispute with one of the City police by the way for comporting himself
bearishly towards a richly-dressed and genteel-looking cat, who was
quietly serenading his mistress, seated at a balcony.

As Tom finished his relation, a slight squeak issued from the pig's
throat, but from its profoundest depths, as if it came from the bottom
of his heart. Once or twice, indeed, he turned his snout to the place
where the bear, who had finished his employer's supper, lay at his full
length asleep, as though he intended to arouse him; but his philosophy
or his physical weakness made him change his resolution, and, making a
motion to Tom to lend him some assistance, he tottered off with
difficulty to bed, where he cast himself down as if he were tired of the
world and its struggles. At least his manner so far affected Tom that he
could not prevail on himself to quit his master's side; but after
watching him with interest for a full hour, and observing him in a deep
sleep, he stretched his body upon some clean straw, instead of seeking
his own crib, and was soon likewise in a state of forgetfulness.

It must have been about midnight that Tom was aroused by a suppressed
grunting; he started up, and, by the aid of the moon, beheld Herr
Schwein lying on his back, and convulsively kicking his legs in the air.
He ran to his head and tried to raise him up, but his weight was more
than he could manage, so he called out in his loudest voice for the
assistance of Bruin. That ungracious beast, however, though waked by the
noise, felt no inclination to have his repose disturbed; so bid him hold
his peace, and let honest folks go to sleep. Tom was a thoroughly
faithful creature at heart, though a rough and untutored one. The want
of feeling displayed by the bear, and his ingratitude in thus allowing
his master to struggle without even lending him a paw, aroused all the
indignation of his honest nature; so, flying at Master Bruin, he caught
hold of the tip of his ear and bit it till the great beast roared with
pain, and, effectually roused, followed his adversary about the place
in order to punish him for his insolence. In his awkward evolutions he
caught one of his legs in a heap of straw, and fell full sprawl over
poor Herr Schwein. A small grunt, like a sigh with a bad cold, escaped
the learned Pig: it was his last! for, when Bruin raised himself up, he
found his late employer perfectly motionless; nor did all his efforts,
such as pulling his snout, and shaking his trotters, and twisting his
tail, succeed in producing the slightest impression. The bear was
puzzled. He squatted down beside his old master, and, sucking his right
paw, whilst he scratched his pate with his left, gazed long at the
prostrate body. Meanwhile Tom drew nigh, and guessing at the truth from
his companion's attitude and the pig's breathless quiet, raised his nose
to the roof of the dwelling and uttered a long and dismal howl of
sorrow. Again and again, at brief intervals, did the faithful servant
thus deplore his master's fate, till Bruin, angered by the noise, threw
the broken drum at the unconscious mourner, with such effect, indeed,
that the shattered extremity alighted on his crown, and for the time
completely buried him, his voice sounding singularly sepulchral from the
depths of the hollow instrument. It effectually stopped the current of
his grief by creating a flood of irritation, which only respect for the
dead prevented his giving vent to, for he would otherwise have little
heeded either the strength or ferocity of his antagonist.

Bruin, who had betrayed no feeling of any kind at the sight of his late
benefactor thus converted into pork, now returned to his own bed, and
was soon again in a comfortable snore; but the faithful Tom still sat
beside the body of his master, and patiently watched there till
daylight.

The sun rose, and many neighbours, apprised of the event, made their
appearance; some urged by curiosity to see how a dead pig looked, some
stimulated by avarice, hoping there might be a trifle or two to pick up,
and a few from a higher motive--the wish, namely, to show respect for
the memory of the deceased, by assisting, if necessary, his survivors.
Herr Schwein, however, had come amongst them alone, nor was it thought
that he had kith or kin; for no mention of any amiable _frau_, or sow,
no syllable of any interesting piglet, had ever issued from his learned
jaws. He died as he had lived, among strangers; and, alas! all the
learning he had acquired was destined to perish with him: for, with one
exception, Herr Schwein had never committed any of his thoughts or
experiences to writing. I have said, with _one_ exception; for the
occasion is worth noting, as it was on a matter interesting, indeed, to
every epicure in the universe. The subject which then engaged his pen
bore the following title:--"_Signs by which the most unobservant may
detect in the soils of the world the existence of Truffles; together
with an Essay on the most effectual mode of cultivating them._" And it
may well be conjectured, from the great learning and fitness of the
writer to deal with such a subject, how much new light must have been
thrown upon it. Unfortunately for the tribes of gourmands, and poor
Piggy's fame, this valuable paper was never destined to electrify the
world; for, cast into the street by Bruin among other articles,
considered, alas! of no value, it was picked up by some ignorant puppy
passing by, who, seeing it written in German character, and not
understanding a word of it, tore up the priceless document to make
lights for his cigars.

Two mastiffs, who had been informed of the death, kept watch meanwhile
without the house; and when night again came on they were joined by a
couple of ugly curs, whose business it was to convey the body to its
last resting-place without the city; for the dogs, with great good
sense, had an intense dislike to bury the dead among the living. The
mortal remains of Herr Schwein being placed upon a kind of sledge, were
drawn slowly down to the little lake, followed by Tom, as chief and only
mourner, for Bruin was so devoid of feeling as to refuse even this last
tribute to the memory of one who had been his best friend; and when the
funeral procession reached the water, the body was gently let down into
the current, which bore it gradually away. Poor Tom sent after it a
prolonged and melancholy howl, the last sad adieu of a simple but
faithful heart; and then turning his steps, which were mechanically
leading him towards his late home, in quite an opposite direction, he
set off upon a lonely pilgrimage, resolving in his own mind that many a
scene should be traversed ere he again gazed on his native city of
Caneville.

Meanwhile Bruin, who felt not the least alarm at Tom's continued
absence, found himself suddenly in a position of the highest prosperity.
As no one was there to claim the property of the deceased, he took
possession of it as his right. Every corner was ransacked, every
hiding-place examined, and a large store of costumes, and things of
every kind, gathered in the course of the late Herr's wanderings in
different lands, were dragged from their obscurity.

[Illustration: A VERY GREAT BEAR.]

His present habitation did not, however, suit his change of fortune: he
must have a house in the most fashionable quarter of the town. When this
was obtained, not satisfied with the simple name his fathers had
honestly borne for so many generations, he resolved to dub himself a
nobleman, which he could the more easily do in a place where his
connexions were unknown, so styled himself Count von Bruin forthwith.
The wardrobe of his late learned employer furnished him with a suit of
astonishingly fine clothes, which fitted him to a nicety; so on every
fine morning, dressed therein, with hat cocked upon his crown, his paws
grasping a cane, and placed under his coat-tails, so as to show off all
the glory of his waistcoat, frill, and splendid jewellery, he marched
into the streets. He made so imposing a figure in his new dress, and
assumed such an air of pomposity, that it was no wonder the uninitiated
should have been deceived, and have taken him for a lion of the very
first nobility; nor can we be surprised that a poor cur, almost in a
state of nudity, should, in the most abject manner, supplicate a trifle
from "His Lordship;" that an ignorant cat, in passing, should take off
his cap and make a profound bow; or a kitten, just behind, cross its
paws as though it stood in the presence of a superior. There was one,
however, who penetrated through all his disguise; one who had watched
him with interest when he made his _debut_ in the public square and drew
down such abundant admiration, and who, by some feeling for which she
could not account, had followed his varying fortunes till she saw him
thus rich, superbly dressed, and strutting down the street, as though
Caneville were too small to hold him,--and that one was the Hon. Miss
Greyhound.




REVERSES.


Solitary as were Bruin's habits by nature, he had felt, since his
residence in a town, a change stealing gradually over him, and the
necessity of companionship becoming every day more sensibly experienced.
In his late position, he had had the constant companionship of Tom and
the learned society of his master, which, indeed, he was but little
capable of appreciating, besides the acquaintance of some inferior
animals whom he had managed to fall in with during his idle hours;
though that these must have been of the very lowest class, the reader,
who is aware of the character of that great beast, will readily suppose.
Tom was, however, now gone; poor Schwein, too, had departed; and Bruin's
fine clothes and altered condition entirely precluded at present a
return to his former associates. Society, he felt, he must have, and
upon his choice now depended his future fortunes. It was whilst this
necessity was pressing on his brain that one morning, when lolling in
all the indolence of ignorance allied to wealth, he was surprised at
the appearance of a diminutive spaniel, admitted by his porter, who,
dressed in a rich scarlet livery, bore a letter in his belt, which he
presented with a certain fawning grace to our hero, and hastily
departed. This was the first epistle that worthy had ever held in his
own paws, so it may well be judged he was but little prepared to
investigate its contents. He turned it over and over, and then put it to
his nose, for the scent which it emitted was pleasant to his sense of
smell; but still this gave him no hint at its meaning. Never before had
he felt the annoyance which a want of education inevitably causes; but
now that it did strike him, instead of arousing his energies to cure so
serious a defect,--a cure, too, which he could under present
circumstances so easily accomplish,--it only moved his anger to think
that the little scrap of paper which he held in his paw, and which he
could without the slightest effort crush into nothingness, withheld its
secrets from him, whilst every mincing puppy in the streets could
command its every word. Ah, Master Bruin! Master Bruin! you are not the
first to make the discovery that knowledge is superior to brute force.
Angry or not, he wished to know the meaning of the note; and summoning
to his presence one who had managed to procure the chief place in his
household, cunning Fox as he was, he commanded that worthy to read its
contents aloud. Fox obeyed, not at all displeased that he should be
selected for this duty, as he foresaw, from the so-called Count's
ignorance, that he would be able at a future period to turn his intimate
knowledge of his master's secrets to good account. He, therefore, read
as follows:--

     "You may believe I must be actuated by a strong feeling in your
     favour, when I thus forget what is due to my sex and rank, and
     overcome all the prejudices which canine society builds up as a
     barrier to intercourse with foreigners. I confess it; the feeling
     _is_ a strong one: but I rely on your honour to save me from the
     ill effects my imprudence might otherwise lay me open to. If you
     are willing to know farther, and are the animal I take you for, you
     will be in waiting tomorrow evening after sunset, at the extremity
     of the mews in the cats' quarter of the city."

This missive, written in bold but feminine characters, was without a
signature; and when Fox had retired, with a cunning leer upon his sharp
features, and Bruin was left alone to meditate upon the singularity of
the adventure, that great beast lost himself in conjectures as to the
writer, and figured to his imagination a creature very different, no
doubt, to the being actually in question. His impatience, however, to
get over the interval of time which must elapse ere his curiosity could
be gratified, was sensibly felt by every inmate of the mansion. Nothing
seemed to go right; the soup was tasteless, the viands were overdone,
and the vegetables raw. Never was there so fastidious a bear; the cook
more than once contemplated some rash act; the poor little turnspits
crept into corners with their tails between their legs, fully expecting
to be sacrificed in some moment of wrath; whilst the various
house-servants, pussies of doubtful reputation, seemed to creep about
the place as though they were every moment in dread of being accused of
purloining certain savoury made-dishes, reserved especially for cook's
private friends. Fox, too, the steward and factotum of the
establishment, appeared not to possess his usual sleek and quiet ease,
but, as the evening drew near, got restless and fidgetty, though he
tried to be calm, and even more jocose than usual. He had been absent
half the morning, no one knew for what purpose; not that he ever
condescended to divulge the causes of his movements, but there was a
slyer look in his eyes, and a sharper appearance about his clever,
pointed nose, than ordinarily animated those features.

The hour drew nigh. The sun was going down when the Count von Bruin,
most superbly dressed, sallied forth from his dwelling. His demeanour
was observed and criticised by every domestic in his household, who,
crowding to the windows, watched that great bear go forth,--as he
fancied, to conquer. Fox allowed him to turn the corner; then,
enveloped in a cloak which completely hid his figure, he let himself
out and glided after his master.

Bruin, meanwhile, strutted on till he reached the quarter of the city
inhabited by the descendants of the feline race; and as he had never
before been in that part of the town, he was at first utterly confounded
by the discordant cries. Instead, too, of the order prevailing in the
canine portions, the inhabitants seemed to take delight in the wildest
gymnastic demonstrations, and certainly seemed to prefer the house-tops
to any other lounging-place. Kittens, in horrible abundance, were
frisking about in every direction, and the scene was altogether of a
character which seemed to justify the wisdom of the magnates of
Caneville in obliging this singular people to dwell in a distinct part
of the town; a rule which, with a few exceptions, was strictly carried
out.

On reaching the mews, a place so called at the outskirts of the city in
this direction, and sufficiently removed from the noisy streets as to
make the spot a very solitary one, Bruin perceived he was alone at the
rendezvous; so, to while away the time, he strutted to and fro, and
meditated, in his usual style, on his own self-importance. He was
aroused from his reverie by a slight bark, or cough; and raising his
head, he perceived in the dim light a tall and graceful figure deeply
veiled.

He hastily advanced, his rough nature for the first time touched at this
proof of confidence, and his vanity suddenly rising to a dangerous
height, and taking the delicate white paw, which drooped gracefully from
a mantle, within his own, he unclosed his jaws to make some tender
speech. But before he had time to commit himself by his ignorance, the
young lady uttered an aristocratic squeak, and darted away with the
utmost swiftness, and Bruin at the same instant found himself seized by
a strong grip from behind. He turned round with a violence which threw
his assailant a dozen paces off, into a pool of stagnant water, his own
coat being slit right up the back by the movement; but he was at once
attacked by half-a-dozen others, who seemed bent on his destruction.
Bruin's great strength, however, served him in good stead; with his back
against an old wall, he received the assaults of his adversaries with
all his wonted ferocity: so that after ten minutes' fighting they drew
off, leaving two of their number motionless on the ground, and a third
struggling in vain to escape from the unsavoury hole where the whisk of
Bruin's coat-tails had cast him. To this spot Bruin now proceeded; and
sitting himself down on the edge, told the struggling dog he would help
him out if he would divulge the meaning of this unexpected attack on
him. The half-drowned cur, having supplicated the bear in vain to let
him out before he commenced his narration, in accents sadly interrupted
by his throat getting at intervals choked with dirty water, explained
that himself and the others of his assailants were the attendants of
one of the most noble families in Caneville; and that their master,
learning from some member of Count von Bruin's household that he (the
Count) intended meeting the eldest daughter at this spot to-night, had
commanded a body of his servitors to be in readiness to fall upon him,
and if possible take him prisoner, for presuming to raise or lower his
eyes to a damsel of such standing.

Scarcely had Bruin heard this communication to an end, than, despite his
promise and the poor dog's cries, he caught up a huge clod of earth and
dropped it upon the devoted head of the struggling animal beneath. There
was a great splash; a bubble or two came to the surface of the horrid
pool, and the brutal deed was consummated. Yet at the same moment Bruin
regretted he had been so precipitate, for he had not learnt _which_
member of his household had played the spy. As he slowly left the place,
he revolved this subject in his mind, but could come to no satisfactory
conclusion; for though Fox appeared the most likely to be guilty, that
worthy animal had made himself so useful to his master, that he could
not well manage without him. He resolved, nevertheless, to watch him
closely, and with this prudent resolve he reached his own door.

Very different was his appearance now to that which it presented on his
issuing from the mansion. His coat torn to ribbons, his hat without a
crown, his majestic frill rumpled and bloody, and his waistcoat without
a single button left wherewith to restrain the exuberance of his linen.
All his domestics were eager in their inquiries and offers of service;
and Fox was so overpowering in his expressions of regret, that all
suspicion vanished from Bruin's brain at once; and he attributed his
informant's tale to some malicious calumny, invented to save his life
and conceal the true cause of the attack upon him.

Our hero, finding that the paths of gallantry were filled with so much
unpleasantness, resolved, like a prudent animal, to avoid them carefully
in future; but as his desire for an introduction to society continued,
he availed himself of the offer of his steward, who promised to procure
him introductions to youth of the best families. The class with which
Fox managed to bring him into connexion was the most worthless in
Caneville, consisting of fast young dogs, who had a singular knack of
reversing the order of nature, and going to bed when other animals were
getting up, and thinking of rising when the discreet part of the world
deemed it time to retire to rest. They had formed themselves into a sort
of club, which they called the "Hard and Fast;" and, indeed, no terms
could better express the habits of the members; for they gamed hard,
drank hard, and talked hard, and lived so uncommonly _fast_, that it was
not surprising that, though quite young, they should have many of the
infirmities of age. To these worthies Bruin was an acquisition; for he
was rich, ignorant, and gullible, whilst they were poor, grasping, and
unscrupulous. At the very first interview, all parties were equally
delighted with each other; the ease of his new companions' manners was
perfectly charming to Bruin, who considered it as a proof of their
breeding, and every following day strengthened the connexion. Riotous
parties of pleasure were constantly projected, for which their friend
Von Bruin paid; banquets of the most expensive kind were always spread
upon his table, at which his "dear fellows of the club"
assisted--themselves; and, indeed, so closely were the bonds of union
drawn, that after some time many of them could not bear to separate from
their esteemed Count; and, therefore, took up their residence with him
altogether.

If disorder were running such a race in company with the chief of the
establishment, it may be conjectured that but little prudence or economy
was displayed by the domestics. Extravagance of every kind ran riot
amongst them as wildly as with their master, and they scrupled not at
all sorts of petty pilfering, where there were none to censure or
restrain. Fox, it is true, had the right, and possessed the influence
requisite to do so; but, for some evil design of his own, possibly that
his private peccadilloes might escape unnoticed, he seemed tacitly to
submit to such a state of things, and in some instances actually
encouraged it. And what could be the only result of such a life of
dissipation, unchecked by a single effort of discretion? Why, nothing
but the most irretrievable ruin; and ruined the bear was after three
months' trial. And when, following a banquet of several days' duration,
the clouded intellects of the beast were made sensible of the fact; when
he found his table cleared for the last time both of servants and
guests; when he traversed the various apartments of his mansion, and
observed all stripped, destroyed, and echoing only to the sounds of his
own footsteps; when, in fine, he discovered that he was again alone in
the world, without any portion of that wealth which he had so sadly
abused, and with many new and vicious tastes which he had no longer the
means to gratify; bitter, indeed, were his lamentations, shocking his
fits of anger. These over, and they lasted long, long days, he seriously
examined the state of his affairs. With the exception of the clothes
upon his back, and a little change in his pocket, he possessed
absolutely nothing, so effectually had his kind friends and faithful
servants stripped him of his means: it was, therefore, with no enviable
feelings he left the house, his house no longer, to seek a shelter for
his head, and a crust to appease his hunger.

He carefully avoided all his former resorts, and directed his steps to
those parts of the town where poverty and vice were accustomed to
assemble, strong in their numbers and their misery. Among them he now
strove to bury his griefs and acquire consolation; but, alas, it was at
the cost of every hope of virtue which might yet lurk in his nature!
Characters like Bruin's, that are ever more apt to imitate the evil than
the good which is around them, can only acquire some fresh stain from
every contact with the wicked; and thus our bear sunk lower and lower in
the scale of beasts, till many even of his new associates at last shrunk
from him.

Some months after Bruin's being turned out of his splendid home there
was a great fair held, just without the town of Caneville; and, as is
usual in such cases, the lowest orders of the population assembled
there. The Hon. Miss Greyhound, who had been a prey to feelings of a
very mixed nature since her interrupted interview with Bruin, had joined
a party of fashionables in an unusually long walk, and on their return
to the city by a different route they came upon the fair. They stopped
on a rising ground at some little distance to view the sports; then
observing a group with a tall ungainly figure in the centre, a little to
the right, they drew nearer to observe the proceedings. The great beast
in the centre had his back to them, so they could not observe his
features; but they saw that his clothes were ragged, his whole
appearance very dirty, and his hat a particularly bad one. A dozen of
heavy sticks were at his feet, and a couple were under his arm; whilst
at some twenty paces distant two wands, with an ornament or trinket at
the top of each, were stuck upright in a straw bag, ready to be
thrown at by any adventurous puss or puppy who had a coin at his
disposal. A couple of cats were lovingly walking at some distance,
another was climbing a large tree which overhung the place, and a fourth
was lazily seated high above; whilst, in the neighbourhood of the animal
who was presiding over the scene, were several dogs and a cat or two
waiting for their turn. The tall beast now altered his position, and the
strongly-marked features of a bear became plainly visible to the party;
at the same time he caught sight of the fashionable group, and, with a
fierce expression in his eye, surlily invited the well-dressed males to
take their chance at "Three throws a-penny!"

[Illustration: THREE THROWS A-PENNY.]

A gentle howl from Miss G. was the only reply, as the party hastily
retreated; for she recognized in the dirty, degraded beast, who was
presiding over this vulgar sport, the object she had once looked on with
affection, the once wealthy Count von Bruin.




PROGRESS.


The fair of Caneville was like fairs in most other parts of the world,
and contained the usual elements of fun and wickedness, toys and dirt,
sweets and other messes. As all these various ingredients looked best at
night, when the broad sun was withdrawn and an artificial light very
feebly supplied its place, it was towards evening that the fair began to
fill, and doubtful characters to ply their various vocations. It was
matter of remark that there was much more quarrelling and ill-humour in
the fair this particular year, than there had been for several previous
periods; and it was also observed that a tall and powerful bear--no
other than our hero Bruin--was ever in the midst of it, either as an
instigator or a principal. This circumstance made the authorities more
than usually alert, and caused Master Bruin to be closely watched.

It was at the close of the last day, after many scenes of evil which it
is not necessary to describe, that a serious disturbance arose in the
part of the field where Bruin had his stand. Blows soon followed angry
words; the contending parties flew at each other with great ferocity;
growl followed growl, and bite succeeded bite, so that a good deal of
blood was shed--ill blood; so, perhaps, better out than in;--and as
Bruin's sticks were conveniently at hand as weapons of offence, they
were soon seized upon, and used so indiscriminately, that almost every
throw told. Many were stretched on the ground, and one of the
mastiff-police was thought to be killed. This was a serious offence,
indeed, and those who knew the penalty attending such a calamity
instantly took to flight. They were as instantly pursued; and when about
to be captured, with one voice denounced Bruin as the culprit; though,
in fact, it was not he who had struck the blow, and they knew it: but
such was his known ferocity and ill-temper, that to shield themselves
they were ready to give up the wrong beast, whom no one loved, and whom
every one would have suspected as the author of the calamity. So the
bear, in spite of his protestations of innocence, and in spite too of a
most furious resistance, in the course of which he got more than one
savage bite from some small animal he had injured, he was dragged off to
prison.

The place used for this purpose was a portion of a ruined castle,
standing in the centre of the town, on the banks of the rivulet before
spoken of; the ruin itself being of great antiquity, and having been
evidently erected by a very different class of beings to that which
formed the present population of Caneville. Several compartments were
adapted for the purpose, all more or less secure; but the square stone
chamber into which Bruin was thrust was the strongest of them all. The
door opening outwards was closed on him, and secured by a heavy mass of
rock, which the united efforts of several of the police rolled against
it; and having thus deposited the prisoner in safety, a couple mounted
guard at the entrance, in case by any chance the great strength of the
bear should succeed in removing the fastening. Bruin seemed, however, in
no humour to make the experiment. Sore and worn out, he crawled into a
corner and was soon fast asleep, resuming in his dreams some of his old
avocations. He woke at daylight, and immediately rose to examine his
prison. The door he sniffed at, but passed by; the window was at so
great a height from the floor that he could not reach it upon tiptoe,
but he remarked that a very delicious puff of fresh air came down an
aperture originally used as a chimney. He moved hastily towards it, and
many feet above observed the blue sky, and the large branch of a tree
waving over the aperture. Had Messieurs the Police been aware of Bruin's
climbing propensities, they would scarcely have left this point
unguarded; as it was, the bear proceeded immediately to take advantage
of it. With a spring he caught hold of an opening formed by a missing
stone, and drawing his body up to his paw, he stuck his foot into the
hole and pressed his broad back against the opposite side; a projecting
brick gave him a second hold, and then the difficulty was over, for the
chimney narrowing he managed to get up by the simple pressure of his
knees and back, and the use of his broad and muscular paws. A few
seconds sufficed for him to reach the top, on which he sat with his
heels dangling in the air, to enjoy the prospect and take breath, while
he deliberated on his farther proceedings.

Meanwhile an inquiry had been entered upon by the authorities of
Caneville concerning the riot, in which one of the police was alleged to
have been killed, but as the object of the inquiry limped into the
assembly during the sitting, it was not considered worth while to hear
evidence as to the authors of his death; and as he, moreover, distinctly
stated that the beast who struck the blow was not a bear, it was ordered
that the bear who was in custody on the charge should be liberated
forthwith. Great was the surprise of his guards, however, on proceeding
to his prison, to find that he had anticipated the verdict and had taken
the liberty of setting himself free; in what way was pretty clear, as,
on looking up the chimney, they were no less amused than astonished to
see him just in the act of swinging himself on to the projecting branch
of the tree and disappear from their view. They ran round into the
court to mark the end of Bruin's manoeuvres, but he had been too quick
for them; not knowing of his being again a free bear, and apprehensive
of being pursued, he had descended the tree with the utmost velocity,
climbed over a ruined wall, and dropping, not lightly, into the stream,
with a few bold strokes reached the opposite shore, where he immediately
climbed a leafy oak, with the intention of waiting till the hue and cry
was over.

He kept his position very quietly all day, rather surprised that no
commotion should be visible in and about the prison, of which he
commanded a good view; and as evening was falling he resolved to
descend, and, recrossing the stream higher up, seek refuge in some one
of his late haunts. Just as he was about putting this resolution into
effect he heard voices beneath the tree, and lay quite still to listen.
But what was his astonishment, as they drew nearer, to perceive that one
of the two foxes from whom the sounds proceeded, was his former steward
and factotum! His interest in their movements was of course increased,
and he listened, with his ears and eyes bent down, to catch their every
syllable and look. The stranger fox, it appeared, was about crossing the
brook to the city, and the other one had accompanied him thus far, but
refused to enter the town. On this, the following words reached Bruin's
ear:--

_Stranger._--I have noticed more than once, cousin, that you avoid the
town; and yet I have known you to declare that no one but a cow could
live in the country.

_Fox._--True enough, my dear fellow; but since I left _his_ service, you
know, I don't care to run the risk of meeting him.

_Stranger._--Ha! ha! I see. You are rather apprehensive he should seize
you by the throat, and exclaim, "_My_ money or _your_ life!"

_Fox._--Hush! hush! who knows what ears may be listening? Enough that I
have a comfortable competency, and don't choose to run the risk of
losing it.

_Stranger._--Well, well, cousin, I say no more; but remember, your
grandfather and mine never left his home for fear of meeting with a wolf
who owed him a grudge, and was found dead in his bed, having been
murdered by the very wolf after all. Come! you needn't look so down
about it, old fellow; nothing half so bad, I hope, will come to
you.--Ta! ta!

So saying, the stranger fox took leave of his cousin, and was soon on
the opposite shore.

Fox waited till he saw him land, and then slowly turned to retrace his
steps.

Scarcely, however, had he taken half-a-dozen paces, than a rushing noise
smote his ears; and before he could raise his head a heavy body struck
him between the shoulders, with a violence which dashed him flat on to
the ground. He neither moved nor uttered a cry: his neck was broken.
With a savage howl, Bruin--for it is easy to guess that it was he--put
his heavy paw upon the other's chest; but finding all still, he examined
his clothes, whence he took all the valuables. He paused in his work to
chide his own precipitancy; for had he followed the Fox he might,
perhaps, have learnt his dwelling and regained great part of his
property. It was too late now; so, giving a savage kick on the face of
the unfortunate animal, he heaped it over with leaves, and pursued his
original intention of regaining the city, and before night was once more
beneath the roof of a late associate.

He remained for several days perfectly quiet and inactive; but finding
no search was instituted for him, he, little by little, resumed his old
habits, and, as many knew to their cost, his old overbearing temper.

[Illustration: SELLING THE NATIVES.]

Among the tastes prevailing to an immense extent in the community of
Caneville, a great love for those dainties which we call oysters had
always been remarkable. It occurred to Bruin, as he had now some
trifling capital, that he would invest a portion in such articles as
made up the fixtures and stock-in-trade of an oyster-merchant: the
former expression is, however, a misnomer, for the stall and tubs
included under the term fixtures would be more properly described as
moveables. This was soon effected; and Bruin having chosen a
semi-respectable thoroughfare, where he would have a chance of a
customer or two from the upper, and would not be too far removed from
the lower class of Caneville society, he planted his stall, arranged his
tubs, spruced up his own person with the addition of a most formidable
collar and a most doubtfully clean apron, and vociferated his "Penny a
lot, pups! penny a lot!" in a way which greatly edified the bystanders.
The bystanders were, however, soon induced to become purchasers, for
very few of them could resist oysters, if they had the wherewithal to
purchase them; and Bruin's natives were so fine and fresh, and he had so
clever a knack of opening them, that it was really worth the money to
see him do that, and many actually went there for the purpose: so that
it really seemed he had at last hit upon a business for which he was
entirely suited, which met also the public views, and that a short time
would enable him, with prudence, to save provision for his old age.

But, alas, the perversity of bears! No sooner did anything like a smile
from Fortune's face alight upon him, than he seemed resolved, by his
uncompromising temper, to turn it to a frown! As long as the business
was new to him, he took pleasure in performing the duties belonging to
it in a proper manner; a little roughly, it may be, but still--properly.
Directly it grew familiar, he became careless; and he had a most wilful
habit of aggravating his customers, which could not, of course, continue
without seriously injuring his trade. For instance, when some pert young
puppy would come forward, and civilly enough request his "one or two
penn'orth of natives," Bruin would first insist on having the money paid
down, and would then tantalise his customer by offering him the opened
oyster and hastily withdrawing it just as the impatient jaws were about
to close on the desired morsel, and so on to the end, to the vast
irritation of many an irascible little animal.

And a day came when this same spirit caused the upset of his trade, and
set a veto upon his "selling the natives," at least in Caneville, for
the future. A fox and a young terrier had both paid their money, and
were eagerly waiting for their oysters, disturbing by their clamour a
grave old dog who was licking the shell of his last penn'orth, when a
domestic from a wealthy family, arrayed in a superb livery cloak, came
up to order a lot for his master. The usual game--if it can be called
so, when all the fun was on one side, was being played--three distinct
efforts had been made by Terrier to get his second instalment, when, in
the struggle which ensued, the vinegar-bottle was knocked over, the cork
came out, and the perfidious liquid, highly adulterated with vitriol
(for, to their shame be it spoken, the dogs of distillers did not
hesitate to endanger the lives of the inhabitants by such practices),
poured in full volume over the rich livery-cloak of the servant, which
was completely spoiled. The master, who was as powerful as he was
avaricious, made a formal complaint against Bruin and his stall as a
nuisance; and as it was impossible even in Caneville to obtain perfect
justice, the report, without other inquiry, was taken as correct, and
Bruin, boiling with rage, had the mortification of seeing his tubs
smashed, his stall destroyed, and his "natives" scattered all abroad
without being able to strike a blow in their defence.




DOWN HILL.


Bruin, that great animal, was seated on a bank overhanging the river,
which, being shallow at this spot, brawled loudly over its pebbly bed,
some parts of which were dry. It was at such a distance from the city,
that all the noises common to its streets were united into one buzz or
hum, and the whole scene was well adapted to suggest meditations upon
private matters, or the affairs of the world in general. Yet Bruin did
not seem influenced by any such reflections: if one might venture a
guess from the appearance of his physiognomy, one would say that nothing
in particular occupied his brains; true, his looks were black, his head
was cast down, his eyes, as usual, were cunning and ferocious, but then
they were always so, and consequently presented no index of what was
passing within.

Suddenly his features brightened, his face assumed an expression of
interest, and he put his paw gently behind him to secure a stone, whilst
his gaze was intently fixed on a dry spot of the bed below. Following
the direction of his look, one might have perceived an uncommonly fat
frog pulling with all his strength at the leg of another one whose body
was hidden behind a heap of pebbles, and certainly the sight was one to
amuse a wiser head than a bear's. The standing-place of the paunchy
little animal being very green and slippery, and the leg which he so
tightly clasped belonging to a fellow creature of no ordinary
robustness, the struggle was diversified every few seconds by the fat
fellow toppling on to his nose or back, or being dragged behind the
heap, and then suddenly reappearing, still holding with passionless
determination to that devoted leg, and tumbling about without uttering a
syllable. It was when the greater part of his body was exposed to view
in a position more comical than dignified, so great were his exertions,
that Bruin's stone, cast with unerring aim, descended upon the
unfortunate frog. It hit him upon the softest and most projecting part
of his back, and had the effect of raising him instantly into a
perpendicular position, when looking round and observing the huge beast
above about to repeat the application, he clapped his broad hand over
the wounded place, and limped hastily away; nor could all the
enticements of the bear, conveyed, it is true, in very unflattering
language, induce him to expose his person to the chances of a second
throw.

Bruin's attention was shortly after aroused anew, by observing a
wretched old dog tottering under the weight of a large bundle, strapped
upon his back, which he was conveying to the city. He came within a few
feet of the bear, whom he knew slightly, and casting down his load,
which he seemed to have brought from a distance, wiped his face with his
ragged tail. Bruin was the first to speak.

_Bruin_ (with a grunt).--Hard at work as usual, eh! Flip?

_Flip._--Yes, Master Bruin, these are hard times; no bone to pick
without it, you know.

_Bruin_ (with a very emphatic grunt).--That depends; some have lots of
bones, and fine clothes, and warm beds, without doing anything harder
for them than picking the one, putting on the other, and sleeping on the
third;--but never mind that; what have you got there in your bundle, old
fellow?

_Flip._--Why, songs, Master Bruin; and you, who are fond of music, might
make mints of money by selling 'em, if you'd only choose to do it.

_Bruin_ (pricking up his ears).--Ah, Master Flip! and in what way?

_Flip._--Why, here are all the new songs that have been sung for the
last ten seasons by the Caterwaullic Society at their new Hall, and a
lot more besides, printed in half-a-dozen columns three times as long as
my tail, and all for a penny. Why, the very names of them are worth
double the money. I'm going to take this package to old Powtry the
bookseller, and, if you're in want of a job, I'll recommend you to him
as one of the venders.

[Illustration: CHEAP HARMONY.]

The proposal in Bruin's state of finance was not to be despised, for
since his forced retirement from business, he had found his stomach and
his pockets, by a very natural sympathy, suffering from precisely the
same complaint--a degree of emptiness, namely--which there seemed no
chance of finding a remedy for; but he had sundry doubts as to his
capabilities for the new employment he was about seeking, particularly
as he was aware his reputation was more notorious than favourable. To
his surprise, however, though his person was well known to the
individual Powtry, not the slightest objection seemed to be made on the
score of anything. The terms of his agreement, alas! not remarkably
liberal, were arranged; Bruin spent a couple of days in conning over his
task, and forgetting to thank the poor dog who had procured him his
situation, he once more entered the busy streets of Caneville to add his
bass voice to the other cries of that populous city. His appearance,
as he made his way into the centre of the most active thoroughfare,
holding in one paw his lists of songs--longer than most of the
inhabitants--whilst his other was thrust into his trowsers' pocket; the
impudent leer upon his face, as he surveyed his audience, and the
careless set of his clothes, which, big as he was, seemed a size too
capacious for him,--immediately attracted a crowd. A butcher's dog, who
had been ordered to make all speed to No. 10 in this same street with a
leg of mutton in his basket, stayed to gape and listen, although he was
standing opposite No. 9. A young pup from a neighbouring alley ran out
at the sound of his voice to learn the news. A spaniel, with long curly
hair and medicine-basket on his arm, could not resist the temptation of
just stopping to hear, though three servants of one of his master's
patients were scouring the streets in search of him; nor could an
eminent vocalist of the feline tribe, la Signorina Pussetta
Scracciolini, pass by without lending an ear to the wonderful list of
melodies. There was another figure, too, who slackened her pace as she
was passing the group, and by an irresistible impulse seemed compelled
to draw near and listen; she was richly dressed in mantle and hood,
which, thrown gracefully back, displayed a head and neck of aristocratic
proportions; she seemed ill, however, and weak, for her delicate paws
were resting on a stick, as though such aid were requisite, whilst her
short breathing seemed to hint that her sorrows were bringing her nearer
to her doom. She must have been once possessed of considerable beauty,
and even now there was enough remaining to distinguish the Hon. Miss
Greyhound.

Thus surrounded, Bruin vociferated with all the power of his lungs,--

"O ... O ... O ... O ... O ... Y ........... A! Never were such times!
Here you are! only look! Double your own length of songs for one penny!
Enough paper to make yourselves a coat to wrap yourselves in melody!
Only one penny! Five hundred of the choicest songs of the Caterwaullic
and Puppeeyan Amalgamated Harmonic Societies; and upwards of five
hundred more of the most popular ditties of Caneville, and all for one
penny!!"

And then he croaked forth the following doggerel (the most acceptable
poetry, by the way, of the city), in which the titles of the songs were
dragged in, without any regard to order, to make up a rhyme:

  "Here's 'What's a Clock?'
  And 'Like a rock
    He stood upon his dignity;'
  With 'Pups alive,'
  And 'We are Five,'
    And dozens more. Who'll buy? who'll buy?
  Here's 'Puss was out,'
  And 'Piggy's snout
    Was longer far than I can tell;'
  With 'Merry Dogs,'
  And 'Yellow Frogs'
    In scores, I'm ready here to sell.
  Here's 'Burning sighs,'
  And, 'Ah! those eyes!'
    And 'Songs for kittens newly born;'
  With 'Stay, oh, stay!'
  And 'Don't say nay,'
    And some no worse for being worn.
  Here's 'Love's an ass!'
  And 'Pass the glass,'
    And 'Jocky is the dog for me;'
  Here's 'Did you ever?'
  'No, I never!'
    And 'I hope it yet may be,'
    And all for one penny!"

And thus he went down the street disposing of his wares with wonderful
rapidity, and producing sundry forced accompaniments to his own wretched
song by treading on the toes of all the pups who were attracted by
curiosity to his vicinity.

A second and a third supply was exhausted before the canine and feline
public of Caneville got tired of purchasing their own measure of song;
whether a fourth would have been successful there was no chance of
discovering, for Old Powtry looked in vain for Bruin with the proceeds
of the last lot. Day after day passed by and still he was absent, until
it was deemed necessary to have a search after him. For some time he
eluded all inquiries, as he well knew his fate if his hiding-place were
discovered; for having appropriated the money of his master to his own
use, he was fully aware that his person would have to pay the penalty of
his transgression. He skulked about the lowest purlieus of the city,
among curs of the most degraded character, as dirty and negligent in
body as they were debased in mind, until, in hourly fear of being
betrayed, he felt that the worst certainty would be preferable to such a
state of suspense and alarm, so resolved to deliver himself up and brave
the worst. He was again cast into prison: for that he was prepared; but
he was _not_ prepared for the wretched place of confinement to which he
was now condemned. On being first thrust into it, he could not behold
all its horror; but when his eyes got accustomed to the semi-darkness,
he found himself in a dismal cell under ground, half full of water from
the overflowing of the river, and teeming with numerous crawling, slimy
things. A little hole, half choked with earth and stones, let in all the
place possessed of light and air; and as the only air which could ever
visit the place had to pass over a bed of stagnant mud ere it reached
the spot, it possessed but few refreshing properties.

Bruin, who had in his despair given himself quietly up to the
authorities, thinking probably that by the very act he might procure
some mitigation of his sentence, now that he perceived his doom, gave
way to one of those fearful bursts of rage which no experience had
succeeded in teaching him to curb. He howled till the dirt sticking
about the vaulted ceiling, and the earth choking up the air-hole,
dropped piecemeal to the ground, and every insect that had ears covered
them up the best way it could to prevent its becoming instantaneously
deafened by the horrid sound; then tearing round and round and round the
confined space of his cell, till there seemed to him fifty windows
instead of one, and the single door appeared suddenly placed in every
part of the miserable vault,--he struck his head against the rugged wall
of his prison, and toppled over senseless on to the ground.




AT REST.


It is not easy to say how long Bruin remained insensible, but it must
have been some time; for when he recovered himself, there was a feeling
of weakness about him as though he had been fasting long. His head, too,
felt sadly dizzy as he rose from his cold bed and pushed his nose
against the hole of a window to procure a little air. From this he
withdrew to pace his narrow cell; and as the turning round increased his
giddiness, on reaching the opposite wall he retraced his steps
backwards, and so continued for a full hour, gently moving his head
meanwhile to the right and left, as was his wont. Then getting into the
driest corner, he threw himself of a heap on the ground, and
mechanically resuming the old family practice of sucking his paw, tried
to bring his mind to bear upon his situation. But this was a matter of
no little difficulty, for the late events of his life had tended very
considerably to weaken an intellect that was never remarkable for
strength; and so he sat, and relapsed into a dozy state, where
forgetfulness, for the most part, presided. At times, it is true, he
would wake up, and the old fire lighting in his eyes, he would dash his
paw on the ground as he observed the prison-walls close around him; but
the feeling was momentary, and it was evident that the indulgence of his
evil passions had so far clouded his reason, that a few weeks' solitary
confinement would deprive him of all power of reflection for ever.

Evening had come again, though it was dark night in Bruin's cell, and
had been so for hours; when suddenly he heard, or fancied he heard, his
name uttered in a loud whisper. A fear he had never before experienced,
an apprehension of he knew not what, stole over him; and it was not till
the voice, a little louder, exclaimed,--

"Bruin! Bruin, I say!" that he dared venture a reply; when, after an
effort, he said,--

"Who calls?"

"A friend," was the ready answer.

"A friend!" exclaimed Bruin, savagely; "then you can't be seeking _me_,
for I have got no friends."

"Come, come, Bruin," said the voice again, "don't be testy; it's I, the
Captain, and you know I never played you false."

Bruin now, indeed, recognised the voice as that of, perhaps, the most
desperate dog in Caneville. He was a bloodhound of large size and
formidable strength, and such ferocity and daring, that few cared to
come into contact with him, lest by some chance they should be involved
in a quarrel which could only have a disastrous termination. Public
report fixed more than one deep crime upon this canine desperado; but
still, somehow, he escaped the power of the law. Bruin felt flattered at
his attention, and inquired what had brought him there.

"Why," replied the Captain, "this is the third time I have been here
already; but though I have called out your name so loudly that I
expected to alarm the guard, I have got no answer till to-night. I
shouldn't have come back again, for I thought you were dead."

"So I have been nearly, Captain," answered Bruin; "but I am not quite
gone yet, you hear. Now you _have_ found me alive, though, what is it
you want; and how can I, shut up here, be of any interest to you?"

"Listen to me, Bruin," said the Captain, as he squeezed his nose into
the tiny window, and dropped his voice to a low whisper; "if you were
out, and at liberty, would you feel inclined to join me and one or two
others in a job we intend to come off to-night?"

Bruin hastened to reply, but the Captain interrupted him, saying,--

"Don't be in a hurry to make a promise, until you know what it is; for,
shut up here as you are, you can't betray the secret if you would, so I
don't mind revealing it. Four of us mean to break into old Lord
Greyhound's house to-night, where we hear there's money enough to enrich
us for our lives; but as we're likely to have some hard work and stout
resistance, and think we are not strong enough yet for the business, we
should like you to join us, if you choose to do so."

Bruin reflected a moment, where reflection was ruin. Had he at once and
scornfully rejected the horrible temptation, there would still have been
hope for him; but, besides the prospect of liberty, though he did not
yet know how that was to be effected, there was the chance of enriching
himself once again; and, above all, there was a prospect of revenge
against the dog who had once sought his life, because he had been
selected as an object of preference by his daughter. His meditations,
therefore, were at once brought to an end, by his resolution to accept
the proposal; but before he did so, the caution he had acquired by
associating with such beasts as the Captain made him say,--

"Let us understand each other clearly. You said just now, 'if I were out
and at liberty;' have you, then, the power to set me free?"

"Provided you will be of the party, and agree to our terms," answered
the Captain.

"And how if I refuse?" pursued Bruin.

"Why," replied the Captain, quickly and ferociously, "you'll stop there
till you starve."

"I accept your offer," said Bruin, after the slightest possible pause;
"and I would have done so without the alternative, for private reasons
of my own: so let me out, old fellow, as fast as you like."

"And you give your word?" said the Captain.

"The word of a bear," replied Bruin.

The other exclaimed,--

"All right! I shall see you again in half an hour."

Never did half hour seem so long. As minute after minute flew by, there
broke upon Bruin's misty brain a notion that, perhaps, this was only a
trick of the Captain's to get him to declare his willingness to join any
desperate deed in order to ruin him; but then, again, he could discover
no reason for such enmity, and could see no advantage accruing to that
individual by such a course. At the very idea, however, of such
betrayal, his teeth gnashed together, his eyes glared in that darkness
like two live coals, and he involuntarily crossed his huge paws over his
chest as though hugging some imaginary enemy. But he recovered his
self-possession on hearing a grating noise at the other side of the
cell, which gradually became louder, until at last a gust of air, which
revived his spirits, came whistling round the vault, and told that his
path was open. The Captain, too, was in an instant by his side to
confirm it. He passed through an aperture, caused by an open iron door,
preceded by his companion, who had, however, first cautiously reclosed
and fastened up the secret entrance; and as they traversed a damp and
dark tunnel, the Captain explained the mystery, by saying this place had
been known to him some time, though it was unsuspected by the
authorities; and that the exterior entrance was so covered up by
brambles, that no one ignorant of the spot could ever imagine what lay
behind, or would care to explore the threatening passage, if by any
chance they discovered it.

As Bruin was exhausted for want of food, and it still wanted some hours
of the time appointed for their undertaking, they proceeded to one of
the old resorts and regaled most heartily, the sense of liberty after
his confinement raising the bear's spirits to the highest pitch. At
length the time agreed on arrived, and the party, prepared for their
desperate and wicked undertaking, set out.

It has been mentioned in a previous part of this history, that Lord
Greyhound was one of the principal grandees in Caneville, both as
regarded fortune and family, and that he lived in a palace befitting his
condition. A crowd of domestics belonged to his household, but the
Captain was aware that their cribs were remote, and that but little in
the shape of resistance was to be feared from them, should they be
aroused. Still great caution was requisite, for if they did not bite
they could bark, and that would be equally as fatal to their success on
this occasion. The only difficulty to be got over was the vigilance of a
porter who slept below, whose fidelity to his master had been tried on
more than one occasion, although what made such attachment singular in
this instance was the fact that the said porter was one of the feline
tribe,--a cat, in fact, of large dimensions, and peculiarly savage
nature. Bruin, however, took upon himself the task of quieting this
servant and keeping watch below, whilst the others should ransack the
mansion, a place of rendezvous being appointed where they were to meet
in case of alarm.

To avoid suspicion they proceeded alone to the scene of their intended
crime, and, favoured by darkness, they reached it unchallenged. Having
gently tried the fastenings in one or two places, they resolved to make
the attempt at a small door at the back, which seemed the most weakly
guarded. Bruin pushed it first quietly with his huge shoulder, and
finding it gradually yielding, without farther ado he placed his knee
against the lower panel, and, with less noise than might have been
expected, sent the door flying from its fastenings. He was the first to
enter, though the others were close behind; but he had not taken two
steps within the house than he saw, as he thought, two balls of fire on
the floor before him,--it was his last look of worldly things,--for at
the same moment the porter Cat, for it was he, sprang at the huge giant
like a fury, and dug his long and pointed talons into Bruin's eyes. With
a howl so dreadful, so awful in its intense agony and rage, that it
seemed to spring from a supernatural source, the affrighted beast rolled
over and over in his pain, crushing the Cat to death in his struggles;
then feeling, even amidst his suffering, the necessity of safety, he
rose to his feet, and ran on, on, on, he knew not whither, till he felt
himself in the midst of water and heard the rushing which it made. So
instantaneous had been the whole transaction that the truth was never
rightly known. The family--nay, the neighbourhood--aroused by the horrid
noise, rushed to the spot, to find the faithful porter dead, with every
bone shattered; the door was open, but no creature was there to tell the
tale. One alone suspected it--one to whom that cry of agony was the
death-blow; for, two days after the event, the Hon. Miss Greyhound
slept with her fathers, the victim of a misplaced and unworthy
attachment.

And Bruin, where was he? Alas! poor beast! Three days after this event
he was discovered by the authorities, half dead with pain, and led back
to prison, which he had left with so little ceremony. His senses,
however, were so bewildered by his situation, that he could neither
explain how he had escaped from his dungeon, nor the cause of his
present deplorable condition; perhaps, too, he deemed it more prudent
to be silent on both these matters. His judges, nevertheless, taking
into consideration his now helpless state, and rightly thinking his
powers of mischief were much abated by the loss of his eyes, pardoned
his previous offence, and thrust him alone and helpless on the world.

For many a long year did the ill-fated animal drag on his wearisome
existence, living on the charity--the scanty charity--of Caneville.
Deprived of sight, no longer able to acquire a livelihood by his labour,
weary, and full of remorse, he daily took his round through the public
streets, soliciting a penny for the "poor blind." A dog, induced for a
weekly trifle and the prospect of an extra bone or two thrown to him,
sometimes by the compassionate as they went their melancholy way, led
him in his wanderings. At first, however, either from ignorance or
carelessness, or a currish malice, he would often guide his helpless
master into positions of difficulty and danger, from which he could
scarce have extricated himself but for the assistance of some benevolent
passers-by; though his situation in such cases--be it said to the shame
of the inferior population of Caneville--too often excited derision and
laughter, instead of aid and consolation. Once, indeed, he was seriously
hurt by the wilful inattention of his guide; for, tottering along as
usual, one fine morning with his staff in one hand, the string attached
to the dog's collar in the other, and his head with the sightless
eyes raised sadly in the air, whilst he uttered his plaintive cry of
"Have pity on the poor blind!" the last word was suddenly converted from
a doleful whine to a howl of pain as his body came in contact with a
post which stood right across his path. Time, which cures all things,
brought at last an effectual remedy to his sufferings, and that remedy
was Death! Ere that great foe or friend relieved poor Bruin, he had
learnt to be repentant of his former life, and was often known to
reprove in others any tendency to those faults of temper or disposition
which had been his own ruin. If he could have recovered the use of his
eyes and have mingled once more with the business of life, it is a
question whether he would have acted up to the precepts which he now
inculcated; but as the experiment was never tried, nor could be, it is
but charitable to think the best.

[Illustration: THE LAST LEAD.]

Months after he had departed this sinful world, a sturdy traveller, with
a particularly wide mouth and short address, entered the city of
Caneville. He stated that he was a native of the place, and had been
wandering far away in other lands. He made various inquiries concerning
former inhabitants of the town, and among others asked for Bruin. His
life, much as I have recounted it, was told to him, and long did the
stranger ruminate over the details. Many portions of it were, indeed,
known to him, for the traveller was no other than our old acquaintance
Tom; but all was interesting. When he had heard it to the end, he
uttered these only words, which might, indeed, serve for moral and poor
Bruin's epitaph:--

  "Ah! he was a Great Bear!"

[Illustration]

London:--Printed by G. BARCLAY, Castle St. Leicester Sq.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of a Bear, by Alfred Elwes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF A BEAR ***

***** This file should be named 28671.txt or 28671.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/6/7/28671/

Produced by David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
