The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Very Secret Agent, by Mari Wolf

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Very Secret Agent

Author: Mari Wolf

Illustrator: Ed Emsh

Release Date: March 12, 2010 [EBook #31612]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VERY SECRET AGENT ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction November
    1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                        THE VERY SECRET AGENT


                             BY MARI WOLF


                        Illustrated by Ed Emsh


     _Poor Riuku!... Not being a member of the human race, how
      was he supposed to understand what goes on in a woman's mind
      when the male of the same species didn't even know?_

       *       *       *       *       *




In their ship just beyond the orbit of Mars the two aliens sat looking
at each other.

"No," Riuku said. "I haven't had any luck. And I can tell you right
now that I'm not going to have any, and no one else is going to have
any either. The Earthmen are too well shielded."

"You contacted the factory?" Nagor asked.

"Easily. It's the right one. The parking lot attendant knows there's a
new weapon being produced in there. The waitress at the Jumbo Burger
Grill across the street knows it. Everybody I reached knows it. But
not one knows anything about what it is."

Nagor looked out through the ports of the spaceship, which didn't in
the least resemble an Earth spaceship, any more than what Nagor
considered sight resembled the corresponding Earth sense perception.
He frowned.

"What about the research scientists? We know who some of them are. The
supervisors? The technicians?"

"No," Riuku said flatly. "They're shielded. Perfectly I can't make
contact with a single mind down there that has the faintest inkling of
what's going on. We never should have let them develop the shield."

"Have you tried contacting everyone? What about the workers?"

"Shielded. All ten thousand of them. Of course I haven't checked all
of them yet, but--"

"Do it," Nagor said grimly. "We've got to find out what that weapon
is. Or else get out of this solar system."

Riuku sighed. "I'll try," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Someone put another dollar in the juke box, and the theremins started
in on Mare Indrium Mary for the tenth time since Pete Ganley had come
into the bar. "Aw shut up," he said, wishing there was some way to
turn them off. Twelve-ten. Alice got off work at Houston's at twelve.
She ought to be here by now. She would be, if it weren't Thursday.
Shield boosting night for her.

Why, he asked himself irritably, couldn't those scientists figure out
some way to keep the shields up longer than a week? Or else why didn't
they have boosting night the same for all departments? He had to stay
late every Friday and Alice every Thursday, and all the time there was
Susan at home ready to jump him if he wasn't in at a reasonable
time....

"Surprised, Pete?" Alice Hendricks said at his elbow.

He swung about, grinned at her. "Am I? You said it. And here I was
about to go. I never thought you'd make it before one." His grin faded
a little. "How'd you do it? Sweet-talk one of the guards into letting
you in at the head of the line?"

She shook her bandanaed head, slid onto the stool beside him and
crossed her knees--a not very convincing sign of femininity in a woman
wearing baggy denim coveralls. "Aren't you going to buy me a drink,
honey?"

"Oh, sure." He glanced over at the bartender. "Another beer. No, make
it two." He pulled the five dollars out of his pocket, shoved it
across the bar, and looked back at Alice, more closely this time. The
ID badge, pinned to her hip. The badge, with her name, number,
department, and picture--and the little meter that measured the
strength of her Mind Shield.

The dial should have pointed to full charge. It didn't. It registered
about seventy per cent loss.

Alice followed his gaze. She giggled. "It was easy," she said. "The
guards don't do more than glance at us, you know. And everyone who's
supposed to go through Shielding on Thursday has the department number
stamped on a yellow background. So all I did was make a red
background, like yours, and slip it on in the restroom at Clean-up
time."

"But Alice...." Pete Ganley swallowed his beer and signaled for
another. "This is serious. You've got to keep the shields up. The
enemy is everywhere. Why, right now, one could be probing you."

"So what? The dial isn't down to Danger yet. And tomorrow I'll just
put the red tag back on over the yellow one and go through Shielding
in the same line with you. They won't notice." She giggled again. "I
thought it was smart, Petey. You oughta think so too. You know why I
did it, don't you?"

Her round, smooth face looked up at him, wide-eyed and full-lipped.
She had no worry wrinkles like Susan's, no mouth pulled down at the
corners like Susan's, and under that shapeless coverall....

"Sure, baby, I'm glad you did it," Pete Ganley said huskily.

Riuku was glad too, the next afternoon when the swing shift started
pouring through the gates.

It was easy, once he'd found her. He had tested hundreds, all
shielded, some almost accessible to him, but none vulnerable enough.
Then this one came. The shield was so far down that contact was almost
easy. Painful, tiring, but not really difficult. He could feel her
momentary sense of alarm, of nausea, and then he was through,
integrated with her, his thoughts at home with her thoughts.

He rested, inside her mind.

"Oh, hi, Joan. No, I'm all right. Just a little dizzy for a moment. A
hangover? Of course not. Not on a Friday."

Riuku listened to her half of the conversation. Stupid Earthman. If
only she'd start thinking about the job. Or if only his contact with
her were better. If he could use her sense perceptions, see through
her eyes, hear through her ears, feel through her fingers, then
everything would be easy. But he couldn't. All he could do was read
her thoughts. Earth thoughts at that....

_... The time clock. Where's my card? Oh, here it is. Only 3:57. Why
did I have to hurry so? I had lots of time...._

"Why, Mary, how nice you look today. That's a new hairdo, isn't it? A
permanent? Yeah, what kind?" _... What a microbe! Looks like pink
straw, her hair does, and of course she thinks it's beautiful...._
"I'd better get down to my station. Old Liverlips will be ranting
again. You oughta be glad you have Eddie for a lead man. Eddie's cute.
So's Dave, over in 77. But Liverlips, ugh...."

She was walking down the aisle to her station now. A procession of
names: _Maisie, and Edith, and that fat slob Natalie, and if Jean
Andrews comes around tonight flashing that diamond in my face again,
I'll--I'll kill her...._

"Oh hello, Clinton. What do you mean, late? The whistle just blew. Of
course I'm ready to go to work." _Liverlips, that's what you are. And
still in that same blue shirt. What a wife you must have. Probably as
sloppy as you are...._

Good, Riuku thought. Now she'll be working. Now he'd find out whatever
it was she was doing. Not that it would be important, of course, but
let him learn what her job was, and what those other girls' jobs were,
and in a little while he'd have all the data he needed. Maybe even
before the shift ended tonight, before she went through the Shielding
boost.

He shivered a little, thinking of the boost. He'd survive it, of
course. He'd be too well integrated with her by then. But it was
nothing to look forward to.

Still, he needn't worry about it. He had the whole shift to find out
what the weapon was. The whole shift, here inside Alice's mind, inside
the most closely guarded factory on or under or above the surface of
the Earth. He settled down and waited, expectantly.

Alice Hendricks turned her back on the lead man and looked down the
work table to her place. The other girls were there already. Lois and
Marge and Coralie, the other three members of the Plug table, Line 73.

"Hey, how'd you make out?" Marge said. She glanced around to make sure
none of the lead men or timekeepers were close enough to overhear her,
then went on. "Did you get away with it?"

"Sure," Alice said. "And you should of seen Pete's face when I walked
in."

She took the soldering iron out of her locker, plugged it in, and
reached out for the pan of 731 wires. "You know, it's funny. Pete's
not so good looking, and he's sort of a careless dresser and all that,
but oh, what he does to me." She filled the 731 plug with solder and
reached for the white, black, red wire.

"You'd better watch out," Lois said. "Or Susan's going to be doing
something to you."

"Oh, her." Alice touched the tip of the iron to the solder filled pin,
worked the wire down into position. "What can she do? Pete doesn't
give a damn about her."

"He's still living with her, isn't he?" Lois said.

Alice shrugged.... _What a mealy-mouthed little snip Lois could be,
sometimes. You'd think to hear her that she was better than any of
them, and luckier too, with her Joe and the kids. What a laugh! Joe
was probably the only guy who'd ever looked at her, and she'd hooked
him right out of school, and now with three kids in five years and her
working nights...._

Alice finished soldering the first row of wires in the plug and
started in on the second. So old Liverlips thought she wasted time,
did he? Well, she'd show him. She'd get out her sixteen plugs tonight.

"Junior kept me up all night last night," Lois said. "He's cutting a
tooth."

"Yeah," Coralie said, "It's pretty rough at that age. I remember right
after Mike was born...."

Don't they ever think of anything but their kids? Alice thought. She
stopped listening to them. She heard Pete's voice again, husky and
sending little chills all through her, and his face came between her
and the plug and the white green wire she was soldering. His face,
with those blue eyes that went right through a girl and that little
scar that quirked up the corner of his mouth....

"Oh, oh," Alice said suddenly. "I've got solder on the outside of the
pin." She looked around for the alcohol.

Riuku probed. Her thoughts were easy enough to read, but just try to
translate them into anything useful.... He probed deeper. The plugs
she was soldering. He could get a good picture of them, of the wires,
of the harness lacing that Coralie was doing. But it meant nothing.
They could be making anything. Radios, monitor units, sound equipment.

Only they weren't. They were making a weapon, and this bit of
electronic equipment was part of that weapon. What part? What did the
731 plug do?

Alice Hendricks didn't know. Alice Hendricks didn't care.

The first break. Ten minutes away from work. Alice was walking back
along the aisle that separated Assembly from the men's Machine Shop. A
chance, perhaps. She was looking at the machines, or rather past them,
at the men.

"Hello, Tommy. How's the love life?" He's not bad at all. Real cute.
Though not like Pete, oh no.

The machines. Riuku prodded at her thoughts, wishing he could
influence them, wishing that just for a moment he could see, hear,
feel, _think_ as she would never think.

The machines were--machines. That big funny one where Ned works, and
Tommy's spot welder, and over in the corner where the superintendent
is--he's a snappy dresser, tie and everything.

The corner. Restricted area. Can't go over. High voltage or
something....

Her thoughts slid away from the restricted area. Should she go out for
lunch or eat off the sandwich machine? And Riuku curled inside her
mind and cursed her with his rapidly growing Earthwoman's vocabulary.

At the end of the shift he had learned nothing. Nothing about the
weapon, that is. He had found out a good deal about the sex life of
Genus Homo--information that made him even more glad than before that
his was a one-sexed race.

       *       *       *       *       *

With work over and tools put away and Alice in the restroom gleefully
thinking about the red Friday night tag she was slipping onto her ID
badge, he was as far from success as ever. For a moment he considered
leaving her, looking for another subject. But he'd probably not be
able to find one. No, the only thing to do was stay with her, curl
deep in her mind and go through the Shielding boost, and later on....

The line. Alice's nervousness.... _Oh, oh, there's that guy with the
meter--the one from maintenance. What's he want?_

"Whaddya mean, my shield's low? How could it be?" _... If he checks
the tag I'll be fired for sure. It's a lot of nonsense anyway. The
enemy is everywhere, they keep telling us. Whoever saw one of them?_
"No, honest, I didn't notice anything. Can I help it if.... It's okay,
huh? It'll pass...."

Down to fifteen per cent, the guy said. Well, that's safe, I guess.
Whew.

"Oh, hello, Paula. Whatcha talking about, what am I doing here
tonight? Shut up...."

And then, in the midst of her thoughts, the pain, driving deep into
Riuku, twisting at him, wrenching at him, until there was no
consciousness of anything at all.

He struggled back. He was confused, and there was blankness around
him, and for a moment he thought he'd lost contact altogether. Then he
came into focus again. Alice's thoughts were clearer than ever
suddenly. He could feel her emotions; they were a part of him now. He
smiled. The Shielding boost had helped him. Integration--much more
complete integration than he had ever known before.

"But Pete, honey," Alice said. "What did you come over to the gate
for? You shouldn't of done it."

"Why not? I wanted to see you."

"What if one of Susan's pals sees us?"

"So what? I'm getting tired of checking in every night, like a baby.
Besides, one of her pals did see us, last night, at the bar."

_Fear. What'll she do? Susan's a hellcat. I know she is. But maybe
Pete'll get really sick and tired of her. He looks it. He looks mad.
I'd sure hate to have him mad at me...._

"Let's go for a spin, baby. Out in the suburbs somewhere. How about
it?"

"Well--why sure, Pete...."

Sitting beside him in the copter. _All alone up here. Real romantic,
like something on the video. But I shouldn't with him married, and all
that. It's not right. But it's different, with Susan such a mean
thing. Poor Petey...._

Riuku prodded. He found it so much easier since the Shielding boost.
If only these Earthmen were more telepathic, so that they could be
controlled directly. Still, perhaps with this new integration he could
accomplish the same results. He prodded again.

"Pete," Alice said suddenly. "What are we working on, anyway?"

"What do you mean, working on?" He frowned at her.

"At the plant. All I ever do is sit there soldering plugs, and no one
ever tells me what for."

"Course not. You're not supposed to talk about any part of the job
except your own. You know that. The slip of a lip--"

"Can cost Earth a ship. I know. Quit spouting poster talk at me, Pete
Ganley. The enemy isn't even human. And there aren't any around here."

Pete looked over at her. She was pouting, the upper lip drawn under
the lower. Someone must have told her that was cute. Well, so what--it
was cute.

"What makes you think I know anything more than you do?" he said.

"Well, gee." She looked up at him, so near to her in the moonlight
that she wondered why she wanted to talk about the plant anyway.
"You're in Final Assembly, aren't you? You check the whatsits before
they go out."

"Sure," he said. No harm in telling her. No spies now, not in this
kind of war. Besides, she was too dumb to know anything.

"It's a simple enough gadget," Pete Ganley said. "A new type of force
field weapon that the enemy can't spot until it hits them. They don't
even know there's an Earth ship within a million miles, until
_Bingo_!..."

She drank it in, and in her mind Riuku did too. Wonderful integration,
wonderful. Partial thought control. And now, he'd learn the secret....

"You really want to know how it works?" Pete Ganley said. When she
nodded he couldn't help grinning. "Well, it's analogous to the field
set up by animal neurones, in a way. You've just got to damp that
field, and not only damp it but blot it out, so that the frequency
shows nothing at all there, and then--well, that's where those
Corcoran assemblies you're soldering on come in. You produce the
field...."

Alice Hendricks listened. For some reason she wanted to listen. She
was really curious about the field. But, gee, how did he expect her to
understand all that stuff? He sounded like her algebra teacher, or was
it chemistry? Lord, how she'd hated school. Maybe she shouldn't have
quit.

_... Corcoran fields. E and IR and nine-space something or other.
She'd never seen Pete like this before. He looked real different. Sort
of like a professor, or something. He must be real smart. And
so--well, not good-looking especially but, well, appealing. Real SA,
he had...._

"So that's how it works," Pete Ganley said. "Quite a weapon, against
them. It wouldn't work on a human being, of course." She was staring
at him dreamy-eyed. He laughed. "Silly, I bet you haven't understood a
word I said."

"I have too."

"Liar." He locked the automatic pilot on the copter and held out his
arms. "Come here, you."

"Oh, Petey...."

Who cared about the weapon? He was right, even if she wouldn't admit
it. She hadn't even listened, hardly. She hadn't understood.

And neither had Riuku.

       *       *       *       *       *

Riuku waited until she'd fallen soundly asleep that night before he
tried contacting Nagor. He'd learned nothing useful. He'd picked up
nothing in her mind except more thoughts of Pete, and gee, maybe
someday they'd get married, if he only had guts enough to tell Susan
where to get off....

But she was asleep at last. Riuku was free enough of her thoughts to
break contact, partially of course, since if he broke it completely he
wouldn't be able to get back through the Shielding. It was hard enough
to reach out through it. He sent a painful probing feeler out into
space, to the spot where Nagor and the others waited for his report.

"Nagor...."

"Riuku? Is that you?"

"Yes. I've got a contact. A girl. But I haven't learned anything yet
that can help us."

"Louder, Riuku. I can hardly hear you...."

Alice Hendricks stirred in her sleep. The dream images slipped through
her subconscious, almost waking her, beating against Riuku.

Pete, baby, you shouldn't be like that....

Riuku cursed the bisexual species in their own language.

"Riuku!" Nagor's call was harsh, urgent. "You've got to find out. We
haven't much time. We lost three more ships today, and there wasn't a
sign of danger. No Earthman nearby, no force fields, nothing. You've
got to find out why." Those ships just disappeared.

Riuku forced his way up through the erotic dreams of Alice Hendricks.
"I know a little," he said. "They damp their thought waves somehow,
and keep us from spotting the Corcoran field."

"Corcoran field? What's that?"

"I don't know." Alice's thoughts washed over him, pulling him back
into complete integration, away from Nagor, into a medley of heroic
Petes with gleaming eyes and clutching hands and good little Alices
pushing them away--for the moment.

"But surely you can find out through the girl," Nagor insisted from
far away, almost out of phase altogether.

"No, Pete!" Alice Hendricks said aloud.

"Riuku, you're the only one of us with any possible sort of contact.
You've got to find out, if we're to stay here at all."

"Well," Alice Hendricks thought, "maybe...."

Riuku cursed her again, in the lingua franca of a dozen systems.
Nagor's voice faded. Riuku switched back to English.

       *       *       *       *       *

Saturday. Into the plant at 3:58. Jean's diamond again.... _Wish it
would choke her; she's got a horsey enough face for it to. Where's old
Liverlips? Don't see him around. Might as well go to the restroom for
a while...._

That's it, Riuku thought. Get her over past the machine shop, over by
that Restricted Area. There must be something there we can go on....

"Hello, Tommy," Alice Hendricks said. "How's the love life?"

"It could be better if someone I know would, uh, cooperate...."

She looked past him, toward the corner where the big panels were with
all the dials and the meters and the chart that was almost like the
kind they drew pictures of earthquakes on. What was it for, anyway?
And why couldn't anyone go over to it except those longhairs? High
voltage her foot....

"What're you looking at, Alice?" Tommy said.

"Oh, that." She pointed. "Wonder what it's for? It doesn't look like
much of anything, really."

"I wouldn't know. I've got something better to look at."

"Oh, _you_!"

Compared to Pete, he didn't have anything, not anything at all.

... _Pete. Gee, he must have got home awful late last night. Wonder
what Susan said to him. Why does he keep taking her lip, anyway?_

Riuku waited. He prodded. He understood the Restricted Area as she
understood it--which was not at all. He found out some things about
the 731 plugs--that a lot of them were real crummy ones the fool day
shift girls had set up wrong, and besides she'd rather solder on the
717's any day. He got her talking about the weapon again, and he found
out what the other girls thought about it.

Nothing.

Except where else could you get twelve-fifty an hour soldering?

She was stretched out on the couch in the restroom lobby taking a
short nap--on company time, old Liverlips being tied up with the new
girls down at the other end of the line--when Riuku finally managed to
call Nagor again.

"Have you found out anything, Riuku?"

"Not yet."

Silence. Then: "We've lost another ship. Maybe you'd better turn her
loose and come on back. It looks as if we'll have to run for it, after
all."

Defeat. The long, interstellar search for another race, a race less
technologically advanced than this one, and all because of a stupid
Earth female.

"Not yet, Nagor," he said. "Her boy friend knows. I'll find out. I'll
make her listen to him."

"Well," Nagor said doubtfully. "All right. But hurry. We haven't much
time at all."

"I'll hurry," Riuku promised. "I'll be back with you tonight."

That night after work Pete Ganley was waiting outside the gate again.
Alice spotted his copter right away, even though he had the lights
turned way down.

"Gee, Pete, I didn't think...."

"Get in. Quick."

"What's the matter?" She climbed in beside him. He didn't answer until
the copter had lifted itself into the air, away from the factory
landing lots and the bright overhead lights and the home-bound
workers.

"It's Susan, who else," he said grimly. "She was really sounding off
today. She kept saying she had a lot of evidence and I'd better be
careful. And, well, I sure didn't want you turning up at the bar
tonight of all nights."

He didn't sound like Pete.

"Why?" Alice said. "Are you afraid she'll divorce you?"

"Oh, Alice, you're as bad as--look, baby, don't you see? It would be
awful for you. All the publicity, the things she'd call you, maybe
even in the papers...."

He was staring straight ahead, his hands locked about the controls. He
was sort of--well, distant. Not her Petey any more. Someone else's
Pete. Susan's Pete....

"I think we should be more careful," he said.

Riuku twisted his way through her thoughts, tried to push them
down.... _Does he love me, he's got to love me, sure he does, he just
doesn't want me to get hurt...._

And far away, almost completely out of phase, Nagor's call. "Riuku,
another ship's gone. You'd better come back. Bring what you've learned
so far and we can withdraw from the system and maybe piece it
together...."

"In a little while. Just a little while." Stop thinking about Susan,
you biological schizo. Change the subject. You'll never get anything
out of that man by having hysterics....

"I suppose," Alice cried bitterly, "you've been leading me on all the
time. You don't love me. You'd rather have _her_!"

"That's not so. Hell, baby...."

_He's angry. He's not even going to kiss me. I'm just cutting my own
throat when I act like that...._

"Okay, Pete. I'm sorry. I know it's tough on you. Let's have a drink,
okay? Still got some in the glove compartment?"

"Huh? Oh, sure."

She poured two drinks, neat, and he swallowed his with one impatient
gulp. She poured him another.

       *       *       *       *       *

Riuku prodded. The drink made his job easier. Alice's thoughts calmed,
swirled away from Susan and what am I going to do and why didn't I
pick up with some single guy, anyway? A single guy, like Tommy maybe.
Tommy and his spot welder, over there by the Restricted Area. The
Restricted Area....

"Pete."

"Yeah, baby?"

"How come they let so much voltage loose in the plant, so we can't
even go over in the Restricted Area?"

"Whatever made you think of that?" He laughed suddenly. He turned to
her, still laughing. He was the old Pete again, she thought, with his
face happy and his mouth quirked up at the corner. "Voltage loose ...
oh, baby, baby. Don't you know what that is?"

"No. What?"

"That's the control panel for one of the weapons, silly. It's only a
duplicate, actually--a monitor station. But it's tuned to the
frequencies of all the ships in this sector and--"

She listened. She wanted to listen. She had to want to listen, now.

"Nagor, I'm getting it," Riuku called. "I'll bring it all back with
me. Just a minute and I'll have it."

"How does it work, honey?" Alice Hendricks said.

"You really want to know? Okay. Now the Corcoran field is generated
between the ships and areas like that one, only a lot more powerful,
by--"

"It's coming through now, Nagor."

"--a very simple power source, once you get the basics of it. You--oh,
oh!" He grabbed her arm. "Duck, Alice!"

A spotlight flashed out of the darkness, turned on them, outlined
them. A siren whirred briefly, and then another copter pulled up
beside them and a loudspeaker blared tinnily.

"Okay, bud, pull down to the landing lane."

The police.

Police. Fear, all the way through Alice's thoughts, all the way
through Riuku. Police. Earth law. That meant--it must mean he'd been
discovered, that they had some other means of protection besides the
Shielding....

"Nagor! I've been discovered!"

"Come away then, you fool!"

He twisted, trying to pull free of Alice's fear, away from the
integration of their separate terrors. But he couldn't push her
thoughts back from his. She was too frightened. He was too frightened.
The bond held.

"Oh, Pete, Pete, what did you do?"

He didn't answer. He landed the copter, stepped out of it, walked back
to the other copter that was just dropping down behind him. "But
officer, what's the matter?"

Alice Hendricks huddled down in the seat, already seeing tomorrow's
papers, and her picture, and she wasn't really photogenic, either....
And then, from the other copter, she heard the woman laugh.

"Pete Ganley, you fall for anything, don't you?"

"Susan!"

"You didn't expect me to follow you, did you? Didn't it ever occur to
you that detectives could put a bug in your copter? My, what we've
been hearing!"

"Yeah," the detective who was driving said. "And those pictures we
took last night weren't bad either."

"Susan, I can explain everything...."

"I'm sure you can, Pete. You always try. But as for you--you little--"

Alice ducked down away from her. Pictures. Oh God, what it would make
her look like. Still, this hag with the pinched up face who couldn't
hold a man with all the cosmetics in the drugstore to camouflage
her--she had her nerve, yelling like that.

"Yeah, and I know a lot about you too!" Alice Hendricks cried.

"Why, let me get my hands on you...."

"Riuku!"

Riuku prodded. Calm down, you fool. You're not gaining anything this
way. Calm down, so I can get out of here....

Alice Hendricks stopped yelling abruptly.

"That's better," Susan said. "Pete, your taste in women gets worse
each time. I don't know why I always take you back."

"I can explain everything."

"Oh, Pete," Alice Hendricks whispered. "Petey, you're not--"

"Sure he is," Susan Ganley said. "He's coming with me. The nice
detectives will take you home, dear. But I don't think you'd better
try anything with them--they're not your type. They're single."

"Pete...." But he wouldn't meet Alice's eyes. And when Susan took his
arm, he followed her.

"How could you do it, Petey...." Numb whispers, numb thoughts, over
and over, but no longer frightened, no longer binding on Riuku.

Fools, he thought. Idiotic Earthmen. If it weren't for your ridiculous
reproductive habits I'd have found out everything. As it is....
"Nagor, I'm coming! I didn't get anything. This woman--"

"Well, come on then. We're leaving. Right now. There'll be other
systems."

_Petey, Petey, Petey...._

Contact thinned as he reached out away from her, toward Nagor, toward
the ship. He fought his way out through the Shielding, away from her
and her thoughts and every detestable thing about her. Break free,
break free....

"What's the matter, Riuku? Why don't you come? Have the police caught
you?"

The others were fleeing, getting farther away even as he listened to
Nagor's call. Contact was hard to maintain now; he could feel
communication fading.

"Riuku, if you don't come now...."

He fought, but Alice's thoughts were still with him; Alice's tears
still kept bringing him back into full awareness of her.

"Riuku!"

"I--I can't!"

The Shielding boost, that had integrated him so completely with Alice
Hendricks, would never let him go.

"Oh, Petey, I've lost you...."

And Nagor's sad farewell slipped completely out of phase, leaving him
alone, with her.

The plant. The Restricted Area. The useless secret of Earth's now
unneeded weapon. Alice Hendricks glancing past it, at the spot welding
machine, at Tommy.

"How's the love life?"

"You really interested in finding out, Alice?"

"Well--maybe--"

And Riuku gibbered unheard in her mind.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Very Secret Agent, by Mari Wolf

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VERY SECRET AGENT ***

***** This file should be named 31612.txt or 31612.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/1/31612/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
