The Project Gutenberg EBook of Z, by Charles L. Fontenay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Z

Author: Charles L. Fontenay

Release Date: May 15, 2019 [EBook #59515]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK Z ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                   Z

                        BY CHARLES L. FONTENAY

             _Time reversal exists at the sub-atomic level
            according to Feynman's Theory--and according to
            that same theory any entity can exist in three
             places at one time.... Does this explain, the
            strange co-existence of Summer, Mark and Wyn?_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
               Worlds of If Science Fiction, June 1956.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


What scientific or supernatural principle is behind the mysterious
appearances recorded some years ago by Mr. Charles Fort, I'm sure I
don't know. It could, of course, be the same as that behind the sudden
appearance of Wyndham Storm in Central Park, but I don't believe I've
heard of a case that exactly paralleled this one.

I gather from a perusal of Mr. Fort's works that it is not uncommon for
these unheralded visitors to come onstage without the formality of
clothing; but I don't believe it's customary for them to bring their
wives along.

I got caught in a thunderstorm that night in Central Park--not New
York's Central Park, but Allertown's Central Park, which isn't as big.
Having no raincoat--the skies had appeared clear when I left home for
the movies--I took refuge in the big octagonal bandstand.

The storm was brief, but spectacular; one of those violent affairs that
often mark the arrival of a cold front to dispel an unusually intense
midsummer heat wave. The rain slashed across the park in wind-whipped
sheets, managing to drench me even in my shelter. Big trees bowed
low and reluctantly hurled away leaves and limbs. Thunder rolled
incessantly and the lightning made an eerie daylight of the blackness.

Suddenly, there was a terrific clap of thunder and a fiery flash that
blotted out everything around me. Shaken, I picked myself up from the
floor of the bandstand, still not sure I hadn't been struck. Blue smoke
was boiling away from a wrecked tree about thirty feet away, in the
midst of a clump of charred, waving shrubbery.

And like Venus rising from the foam the naked woman stepped out of the
shrubbery, followed by the naked man.

My first impulse was to laugh at these two whom the storm had chased
from their hiding place and to be astonished at their brashness in
disrobing completely in the heart of the park. Then it occurred to me
that the lightning must have stripped them. They might be hurt.

I jumped from the bandstand and walked swiftly over to them. To my
utter amazement, the young woman promptly threw her arms around my neck
and said:

"Whatever has just happened, Don, I want you to know it's you I love."

Then she kissed me.

"What on earth!" I exclaimed, disengaging myself. The man was looking
from one to the other of us, mutely.

"I'm Summer Storm and this is my husband, Wyn Storm, and we live at 138
March Street," she said, all in a rush. "Oh, Don, I'm sorry you don't
know us any more, but I should have known from the way Wyn was acting
and everything that's going to happen...."

"Wait a minute, wait a minute!" I interrupted. "I don't know you. How
did you know my name?"

She didn't answer, but just stood there, looking at me intently. I
averted my eyes. I was beginning to recover from shock enough to be
embarrassed.

"How about this?" I asked the man. "Why should I know you, and where do
you come from?"

"I'm afraid I don't know," he replied, sounding perfectly honest about
it. "I'm afraid I don't remember anything. Do you suppose I have
amnesia?"

"That's possible," I said. "But your wife seems not to be bothered with
it. All right. Summer Storm and Wyn Storm it is--but the names are too
trite in these circumstances not to be false. Both of you had better
get back in the shrubbery while I get some help."

I found the policeman on the Main Street beat. As I thought, it was my
old friend, Gus Adams. He accompanied me back to the park, the rain
gleaming on his slicker.

"They picked a good address to lie about," he said, when I had
explained the situation to him on the way. "The house at 138 March
Street is vacant."

"They're probably spooners who got caught by that lightning bolt and
are too ashamed to give their right names," I said. "If they had any
clothes, I don't know what happened to them. I didn't see any in those
bushes."

"What do you figure I ought to do with them, Mr. Gracey?" he asked.

"They look like decent youngsters," I said. "If it's all right with
you, we'll take them out to my house until they're ready to let me help
them get back where they came from."

"You're taking a chance," he grunted. But we wrapped the woman in his
slicker and tied my best suit coat around the man's waist. Gus called
the town's only patrol car and had them drive us out to my house.

I suppose nudists and doctors eventually reach the point where they
look on nakedness as normal. But, to me, my "orphans of the storm"
looked a lot more like human beings when I had them clothed in a couple
of my old sweaters and some slacks.

They might have been twins. For all I knew, they were, in spite of the
woman's claim that they were man and wife. Their eyes were an identical
sky-blue, their hair an identical pale, wavy gold. Her hair was cut
short, his needed cutting, so they were a good match. I judged their
ages to be about 23, although I've been over-estimating young women's
ages since I passed 30.

"Now, suppose you tell me where you're from and what this is all
about," I said sternly, when they had finished eating the meal I had
rustled up for them.

The man spread his hands and, for the first time, he smiled. It was the
smile of an archangel. Whatever the failure of his memory, his smile
was that of wisdom and patience. I was to find, not much later, that
the woman's smile was its feminine counterpart.

"I'm afraid I don't remember anything before standing in the park in
the rain," said the man.

"What's wrong? What's wrong, Don?" demanded the woman, a note of
hysteria in her voice. "What's happening to us?"

"It's just that I don't understand this situation at all," I said. "You
say you're husband and wife. Then you won't mind both sleeping here in
the den, and tomorrow we'll see what we can find out."

In this remarkable fashion began a remarkable fifteen years.

       *       *       *       *       *

Looking back on it, I suppose I loved Summer Storm from the time I saw
her. I've been trying to decide what that makes me. Incestuous? Just
narcissistic? Or, perhaps, Jovian?

She was alone in the den when I looked in the next morning before
breakfast. Wyn--short for "Wyndham," I learned later--was wandering
around in the back yard, looking lost.

Summer had a pair of my scissors in her hand, evidently preparing to
trim her hair. Somewhat to my surprise, she looked contrite when she
saw me.

"I just thought I might look better with short hair," she explained.

"Good Lord, it's too short now!" I exclaimed. "I like women with long
hair."

She hesitated, then reached up to begin clipping. Somewhat nettled, I
turned on my heel and walked out.

That incident is noteworthy for its strange sequel. At breakfast, I was
thunderstruck to observe that Summer Storm's hair was long--at least
shoulder length, for it was done up in a neat bun behind her head.
Where in my house had she found a wig to match her own hair? And how
long must the wig have been originally, for her to have cut from it the
long tresses I found later in the wastebasket?

After breakfast, I took Wyn with me to check on the house at 138 March
Street. I left Summer at home. Although she claimed to remember things
and Wyn said he couldn't, I could make nothing of her "memories." There
was a strangeness about talking with her, too, something I couldn't
quite put my finger on yet.

As Gus had said, the house at 138 March Street was vacant. It was for
rent. The owner, old Albert Meecham, lived next door, and I made an
impulsive decision on the spot.

"Your wife insists you live here, so you two must be connected with
this address in some way," I told Wyn. "I'll rent the place for you
while we're trying to run down some information on your background. If
you decide to stay in Allertown, you can pay me back after you get a
job."

The only way I knew to probe the origins of Wyn and Summer was through
the customary channels. That afternoon, I went down to the police
station to talk with my friend, Gus, before he started on his beat.

The Allertown police station is nothing but a room in the ancient city
hall, a block off Main Street, but it does have a separate outside
entrance. Gus was sitting on a bench in the shade by the entrance,
fanning himself with his cap. The perspiration pasted his dark blue
shirt to his well-padded arms and chest. The relief the storm had
brought hadn't lasted long.

I sat down on the other end of the bench.

"Gus," I said, "can you fellows help me find out who those people
are we picked up in the park last night? It's funny, but the man has
amnesia, and I think the woman's a little strange in the head."

Gus looked at me a little reproachfully. He laid the cap down, to pull
his handkerchief from his hip pocket and mop his brow.

"You mean that story you told me was the truth?" he asked. "I thought
they might be some relatives of yours, that had got into some sort of a
scrape. Both of them look a lot like you."

"Do they? Well, they're no relatives of mine. I'd like to know just who
they are. Mr. and Mrs. Wyndham Storm, she says."

"They don't come from Allertown," he said. "I'd know them if they was
from Allertown. But they was raised around in this country somewhere."

"How do you know that?"

"There's a way of talking folks have around here. You don't hear it
outside these three or four counties, and you wouldn't notice it if you
wasn't watching for it. Take my word for it, those folks was born and
raised not fifty miles from here."

"Well, just to be on the safe side, you'd better check to see that
they're not wanted criminals," I said. "Amnesia would make a good dodge
for a criminal."

"I've already done that," he said quietly. "They're not."

Wyn and Summer weren't missing persons from anywhere in our section of
the state, either. Gus looked into that angle very thoroughly during
the next few weeks, and reported failure.

Wyn got a job as clerk at McClellan's Dry Goods Store and, for reasons
he did not confide to me, enrolled in night classes at Slayden College.
He and Summer soon were established in the neighborhood as "that nice
young couple that Don Gracey brought in from somewhere out West." How
the townspeople got started on that Western origin theory, I don't
know; I suppose it's natural for people to tack some sort of an origin
on strangers.

I confess that their origin soon became a matter of minor importance
to me, although I remained curious about it. I found Wyn extremely
likeable; we became very close friends, although I estimate that I am
ten to fifteen years older than Wyn. And, as I say, I was in love with
Summer, although it was a long time before I admitted that to myself.

I told myself I felt about Summer as I would my own daughter, if a
bachelor like me could say such a thing; and I felt toward Wyn as
though he were my son. There was a good deal of accuracy to that
description of my feelings, but there was a mystery about Summer that
drew me powerfully.

I think the unattainable in woman is always irresistible. Summer
had the most peculiar air of unattainability about her I ever have
experienced. It was as though, when I touched her, it was a fleeting
touch; when I looked at her, I was constantly beset by the feeling that
she would, the next instant, shimmer into insubstantiality.

Talking with her heightened this illusion, rather than lessening it. A
conversation with Summer was a unique experience. It was a little like
two people trying to talk at once, each talking, then each hesitating
to let the other have his say. Our words crossed each other, like
scissor blades that do not quite meet. She might answer a question
before it was asked, or take the conversation off on tangent after
tangent. Disconnected, discontinuous--those adjectives describe our
conversations.

Except for his amnesia, dating back to the night in the park, Wyn
was perfectly normal. After some time, he confided that he, too,
was concerned about Summer's strangeness. I got the impression from
him--though he did not go into great detail--that it extended beyond
her conversation, to her actions.

"It seems to me that I ought to know what's wrong with Summer," he told
me, very puzzled about it. "I mean, it seems I ought to remember. But I
don't. I've gone so far as to talk it over with her."

"What did she say?" I asked.

"She said she wasn't going to tell me now. She said she'd tell me one
of these days, but that when she did, I'd leave her. She smiled all the
time she was saying it, in the strangest way."

Well, we had Summer examined. Old Doctor Lodge is no psychiatrist,
but a man isn't a general practitioner for as long as he's been at it
without learning something about the way a person's mind ticks. He said
there was nothing wrong with Summer, mentally.

"She acts like she's still suffering a little from some sort of shock,"
he said. "If she was right next to a lightning bolt when it struck, I'm
not surprised. It's lasting a little longer than such things usually
do, but it'll clear up."

It didn't clear up, but Wyn and I got used to it.

Amateurs, they say, shouldn't fool around with hypnosis, and I suppose
there's a sound reason behind that admonition. But I'm a little better
than the average amateur hypnotist. I've not only done a good deal
of it at club benefits and what not, but I've read pretty heavily in
psychology. I decided to see if hypnotizing Wyn would give me any clue
to his past and Summer's.

Summer sat beside me that night at their home, as I went through the
familiar motions and Wyn sank into hypnotic trance.

Under hypnosis, Wyn recalled easily everything that had happened since
that night in the park. But attempts to regress him past that night
brought only a death-like silence, in which he sat pale and immobile.
I tried several times, and at last succeeded in getting him in an
extremely deep hypnotic state.

Suddenly, Summer interrupted with an exclamation.

"That's me!" she exclaimed. "That's what I told him four years ago!"

"Quiet, Summer," I commanded, looking at her curiously. "I think I may
be able to get something out of Wyn now."

Despite total lack of response when regressed to ages 22 and 20, I
regressed him to age 18. He stirred and murmured. His eyelids fluttered.

"What do you see?" I asked eagerly. "What are you doing?"

"Wyn?" he exclaimed. His voice was clear and treble, the voice of a
woman, as he called his own name. He clenched his fists, and moved his
head from side to side. "Wyn, I'm going to have a baby!"

"What!" I exploded, amazed. "Wyn, what do you see?"

He opened his eyes.

"Why, I see you, Don," he said in his normal hearty voice. "What else
should I see?"

With a suddenness I never have seen before or since, he had come out
of the hypnotic state. I was afraid to delve any deeper. I didn't try
hypnosis again.

       *       *       *       *       *

During these first few years, Wyn and Summer gradually lost that
identity of appearance which had made them look so much like twins the
night I found them in the park. Wyn aged, not excessively but as any
adult man would age in a few years. Summer, on the other hand, seemed
to have found the secret of eternal youth. She grew ever more delicate
and beautiful, and her fair skin seemed to take on a translucent glow.

I was a close friend of the couple, and I found that I was alone with
Summer a good deal. Summer had shown an interest in schooling, too.
She started in college with Wyn, then dropped back to high school,
and finally fell back on studying at home. It wasn't that she wasn't
bright. She seemed to recognize the facts she was studying almost at
once, but tests and examinations were her downfall. She never could
remember enough of the things she had studied to make a passing grade.

So I went to the house at 138 March Street often in the early evenings,
to help Summer in her studies.

Their son was born about six years after they came to Allertown. It was
a peculiar thing. There was no noticeable sign of pregnancy. Summer was
sure she was pregnant, but Doctor Lodge scoffed at her, right up to the
time of the birth.

"Sure, she has milk," he told Wyn and me, tugging at his white mustache
and giving us a wise smile. "It's not unusual. She isn't carrying a
child, though. It's a false pregnancy."

But the child was born. Then Doctor Lodge reversed himself and insisted
she was carrying an unborn twin. Again he was wrong. Summer gradually
but steadily recovered from the effects of the birth and regained her
slender figure.

I still do not attempt to excuse Wyn for leaving his wife and newborn
son. He was overwrought, it's true, but he should have taken them with
him.

Instead, he came to me, his suitcase packed, when the child was about a
month old. His face showed his agitation.

"Don, I'm leaving Summer," he said abruptly.

"Wyn! Why? What's happened?"

"I found out yesterday why she acts and talks so strangely. She
told me. I couldn't sleep last night, and I've decided I must leave
Allertown. Somewhere there may be people who can help me, but I can't
find the help I need here."

"Was it so terrible?" I asked, trying to calm him. "What did she tell
you, Wyn?"

He leaned forward intensely, pointing a finger at me, and opened his
mouth to speak. Then he shut it and sat back. He shook his head.

"No," he said. "Maybe it wouldn't affect you as it has me, but you
couldn't feel comfortable about it. All I want from you, Don, is the
promise that you'll take care of Summer and little Mark for me until I
come back."

"You know I'll do that. They can move in here right away. But I think
you're making a mistake, running away from whatever it is."

"I'm not running away," he replied. "I told you, I've got to have help."

That's all he would say. He left on the mid-afternoon train for Mayer
City, and I went around to 138 March Street to help move his wife and
child into my own home.

I didn't recall until three days later that Summer had predicted--or so
Wyn had said--that when she told him why she acted as she did, he would
leave her.

       *       *       *       *       *

If I can't excuse Wyn for leaving his wife and child, I have even less
excuse for becoming his wife's lover. The fact that the interlude
may have been necessary to his very existence--and hers--is no
justification, for I did not know that then. Nor do I know it certainly
now.

But picture the plight of a man who has in his home a young and
beautiful woman, the realization growing on him, day by day, that he
has loved her for six years. And it was Summer's fault, as much as my
own. Perhaps more. Despite Wyn's words, I could not be sure that he
would return to her, and certainly she must have known that he would.
Despite this, she did more than merely encourage me.

I have wondered often about the philosophical implications of this
fact. If Summer had not encouraged me, I wouldn't have been bold enough
to make any advances on my own account ... and where would that have
left Summer?

On the other hand, it was the most natural thing in the world that
Summer should encourage me. She knew.

Wyn had been away only about two months when Summer, rousing herself
from a deeply pensive mood one night, sat down by my side on the sofa
and snuggled up close to me. I couldn't bring myself to pull away from
her, but I exclaimed:

"Summer, this isn't right. What about Wyn?"

"I don't understand this coolness toward me, Don," she said, laying
her head on my shoulder. "People who love each other shouldn't act so
aloof."

I was thunderstruck at this admission. But I couldn't help saying what
I said then.

"I do love you, Summer," I confessed, almost choking.

At once she arose and left me. I thought I had offended her, and I was
almost relieved that I had. It was best that she should be discouraged
about any ideas she might have about me.

But thirty minutes later she gave me a smile that made me not so sure
she was offended. And the incident seemed to increase, rather than
dampen, the warmth of her attitude toward me.

It was unpardonable, with Wyn gone so short a time, but I had no
strength to resist the inexorable attentions of a woman I loved. When
she came to me in negligee late one night a week later, I became
Summer's lover.

I have said it was partly Summer's fault, and the sequence of events
would make it appear almost entirely her fault. This is not true; and I
found out several years later why it is not true.

My inexcusable affair with Summer lasted for about a year, before the
conversation occurred which caused me to terminate it abruptly. I
had just entered the parlor, where Summer was curled in a big chair,
reading.

"I don't see any reason for our not loving each other, if we really do,
Don," she said petulantly. "Wyn says he's my husband, but I don't feel
that he is. Why should I be tied by a marriage ceremony I don't know
anything about yet?"

I could not answer, for I was looking at her through new eyes. Her tone
of voice had been so like that of an indignant child that it awakened
me to something I should have seen before.

How like an adolescent girl she was, really! The pale gold hair framed
a young face. Despite the rondures of her figure, there was a looseness
about the way her legs were attached to her pelvis, giving her frame
that impression of hollowness that is frequent among slender young
virgins.

In the seven years I had known her, how could I ever have built up in
my mind the picture of her as a mature woman?

When I thought about that sudden protestation of hers, made after we
had lived as man and wife for a year, it seemed to me that it could
only have arisen from remorse at such a situation. But it was neither
this nor the fact that I was wronging her and Wyn that caused me to
resolve then and there that never again would I so much as kiss her. It
was that she was too young!

I did not waver in that resolve, from that time on.

But I thought a great deal about this matter: I had known Summer for
seven years and she had been a woman when I first saw her. Yet her
youthful appearance now made it impossible that she should have been
adult then. Surely my memory did not play me wrong in picturing the
Summer Storm I had seen that night in the park; indeed, the picture of
her was burned indelibly on my mind. She must have, in the interim,
become slighter, even smaller.

Oddly, this slenderizing process, once I noticed it, seemed reluctant
to stop. The bathroom scales proved that she was losing weight slowly,
but in her appearance the decline progressed much more rapidly.
She began to get leggy and angular and she completely lost the
once-voluptuous contours of her body, despite all the milk and starchy
foods I could feed her. Nor was it that she lost appetite. She ate
voraciously.

At the same time, I became convinced she was losing her memory. Chance
remarks dropped at odd times indicated that her recollection of Wyn, of
the events before Mark's birth, of all her past life in Allertown, was
extremely faulty; she never had shown signs of remembering any events
before she came to Allertown.

As a matter of fact, it became increasingly apparent that she no
longer accepted Mark as her son. The boy was growing out of babyhood
with that speed which is so remarkable in children. She cared for him
solicitously, but seemed to look on him as her little brother.

Of course, I took her to Doctor Lodge. He, in turn, went with us to
consult doctors at Mayer City. He could find nothing wrong with Summer
physically, nor could they.

They seemed to think we were faking. They heard my assurances, and
those of Doctor Lodge, that Summer must be approaching the age of
thirty, with obvious skepticism.

"There is nothing wrong with this girl except an unfortunate emotional
aberration," one doctor told me flatly. "Physiologically she is a girl
of about fourteen, and it is difficult for me to believe that her
chronological age is any higher."

"As I told you before, she has a son nearly four years old," I said.

"I don't say that's impossible at her age, for it isn't," he retorted.
"But this girl has never been a mother. She's a virgin."

I should have realized what all this meant. I believe there have been
such cases in medical history before. But I suppose I was too close to
it. I didn't understand, even when Summer reposed childish confidence
in me.

"I know what's going to happen, you know, because it's already happened
to me," she said. She was a skinny girl now, with enormous blue eyes.
"You know what's happened, because it's already happened to you. Isn't
it funny?"

Fortunately, Wyn returned not long after that. Wyn had the answer to
the questions that had been puzzling me.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wyn gave no warning of his return. He just walked into the house one
afternoon, carrying a suitcase and smoking a pipe.

When I found Wyn and Summer in the park, they had appeared to be twins.
During Wyn's absence his hair had begun to gray--prematurely, I'm
sure--and now he looked like Summer's father. The change in her must
have been even more noticeable to him than it was to me, because he had
been separated from her during its most remarkable development. But he
showed no surprise at it.

"I knew what the trouble was before I left," he said soberly. "You see,
as Summer's husband I was much closer to her than you could be, even
since she and the boy have been living with you."

I could feel my ears turning red. I asked hurriedly:

"What is wrong with Summer, Wyn?"

"She lives backwards," he said. "Time is reversed for her. It isn't
only a physiological reversal. Everything goes backwards in time for
her. The future is the past to Summer, and the past is the unknown
future. She remembers the future, Don--she remembers it, because she
has seen it happen."

"That's impossible!" I exclaimed. "How can she? It hasn't happened yet!"

"To her it has," he replied. "It may upset your conception of the
future as a fluid thing of limitless possibilities, but Summer's
experience is pretty good evidence that it is as frozen and stable as
the past. As the Orientals say, what is to be will be."

I thought about that, and I thought I detected a flaw.

"Oh, no!" I said. "Wait a minute here, Wyn. If she can't remember
the past even a minute ahead, you couldn't even talk with her. She'd
remember what you were going to say, instead of what you had said. Not
only that, she'd talk backward! You'd never be able to understand her."

"People are adaptable," he replied. "She evidently learned to talk
backward--to her; correctly, to us. People learn to talk so others can
understand them. And as for conversation, do you remember Summer ever
answering a question directly?"

I started to say I did, for it seemed that I did. But a moment's
reflection changed my mind. Not a direct question; and her
participation in a conversation always had been a jumpy and disturbing
thing.

"But we can talk with Summer," I protested. "For years we've been able
to understand each other."

"Like writing letters that cross in the mails," he said. "And I think
people do have some knowledge of the immediate future, even you and I.
Summer would develop that faculty more than the average person."

Certainly. No wonder she had been so affectionate to me that it had
been impossible for me to resist her. To her, at that time, we had
already been lovers. By the same token, my own knowledge when the
affair was concluded that we had been lovers must have created in me an
attitude that was a strong incentive for her to yield to me at the end
of our relationship--the beginning, to her.

What a way to live! Always trying to guess, from the conversation of
those around her, what (to her) was going to happen, so she could react
intelligently.

"But," I protested, still unwilling to accept it, "if the past is the
future to her, her actions could affect the past."

"Exactly," he said. "I told you, this means you have to accept the
principle that the past is just as mallable as the future, and the
future is no more mallable than the past."

Wyn had known all this before he left. He had gone, not just to avoid
seeing his wife revert to childhood before his eyes, but to delve into
studies on the nature of time itself. Where he had been, how he had
supported himself I didn't know. I still don't know.

Summer, her age now about thirteen, was old enough to understand that
she was Wyn's wife, but he did not resume his position as husband to
her. Instead, he acted toward her and Mark both as a father. Me? I
suppose I was something in the nature of a benevolent uncle now.

As a matter of fact, Wyn plunged so deeply into work that the task
devolved upon me to be both father and mother to Summer and her child.
Mark, developing apace into a vigorous young specimen, looked like both
his parents--since their features were so much alike, he could not be
said to resemble one more than the other.

Wyn did not return with his family to the house at 138 March Street. It
had long been occupied by someone else. He moved in with us and, with
my tacit consent, made my home both his home and the headquarters for
his work.

His work actually was double. He got a good job, this time as engineer
at the Allertown Mill Industries. During all his spare time, he worked
at converting my precious den and my basement into something completely
beyond my understanding.

There are some people who accept misfortune and live with it--or die
with it. Others battle it angrily to the bitter end, even when there
is no evidence that anyone ever conquered their particular misfortune
before. Admittedly, there was little precedent for Summer's case;
and this made the prognosis even less optimistic. Still, Wyn was
constitutionally the latter type of person.

"I don't know how much longer she lived in the past before you found
us," he told me. "Nothing I could do has helped my amnesia for that
period. She may have lived to a ripe old age, for all I know.

"But we know that she has only a few years to live, the way she is
now--perhaps twelve or thirteen. That's her physical age, and she is
living backwards toward babyhood."

"What will she do?" I asked curiously. "Just fade away?"

"She has to be born," he answered solemnly. "My guess is that, a few
years in the future, there will occur the most unique birth ever known
to man--a birth in reverse. Some couple, somewhere--perhaps someone
we know here in Allertown--will live through the experience of the
daughter they never knew reentering the mother's womb and retracing her
steps through the embryo stage to the moment of conception."

"Fantastic!" I exclaimed.

"It must be true;" he insisted. "It has to be true, unless she
reversed ... will reverse ... her direction in time after birth. In
that case, perhaps some baby girl here even now is Summer, living
coexistently with her reversed self."

"If you're going to reverse her direction in time again and make her
live normally," I said, for he already had told me this was his aim, "I
don't see how you can prevent a paradox. She has already lived in the
past as an adult woman. If you reverse her existence at this stage,
then she can't be born, because she'd be living from her present age
on, both forward and backward in time."

He shook his head.

"I don't know," he said. "Perhaps it can't be done. Perhaps it would
involve a parallel time stream, if there is such a thing. All I know is
that I must try. If I can, she might still consent to be my wife later,
if the difference in our ages isn't too great. That would be up to her."

"I don't see how you even know where to start on such a project," I
confessed.

"The chances are slim," he admitted, "but I have some hope. The only
actual time reversal we know, scientifically, is at the sub-atomic
level. The theory was advanced by Feynman that annihilation of an
electron-positron pair upon contact might be, not actual annihilation,
but a 'time reversal' of the electron. The emission of a photon of
energy, in such cases, is powerful enough to cause a recoil in time,
and the positron is merely the electron traveling backward through time
after the energy explosion."

I looked extremely blank.

"Look," said Wyn, taking up a pencil. He drew a big "Z" on a piece of
scrap paper, labelling the two arms "E" and the connecting line "P".
The angles he marked "A" and "B:"

       *       *       *       *       *

"The flow of Time is from left to right," he explained. "At left is the
past, at right the future. This electron, E, is moving normally along
at the top of the diagram when it runs into an energy explosion at A.
It reverses itself, going back through time as the positron, P, until
it hits another energy explosion at B. Then it is reversed again into
the right time direction, continuing as the electron E, at the bottom.
You follow the line, as the pencil point does in making the Z, and it's
a single body."

        E
    ---------
            /A
           /
          /
         /P
        /
       /
      /   E
    B ---------

"But," and he drew a vertical line through the Z, "we move always
forward in time. To us, the energy explosion at B happens before the
one at A. Suddenly at B, a positron and an electron are created out
of nothing. The electron at the top apparently has nothing to do with
either of them. But the positron moves along and collides with it at A,
leaving nothing there again--except, once more, an apparently unrelated
electron, the one at the bottom of the diagram."

"But you're saying the same thing can exist in three places at once," I
objected.

"Exactly, but in one of those places, it's traveling backward in time.
So, if Summer's time reversal occurred or will occur after birth, she
may be existing somewhere else, as a younger girl, right now; besides
being here in the house with us."

"Your example is, as you say, at the atomic level," I said. "How can
you transfer that into terms of human beings?"

"The only thing I know to do," he said, "is to create an energy
explosion which I know won't hurt Summer physically, but may reverse
her back to a normal direction. It would be like the energy explosion
that meets the positron at B and forces it to continue existence as an
electron."

"It appears to me," I said slowly, trying to grasp the concept, "that
your explosion at B would have to have happened already if it were
going to happen at all."

The amazing thing about it is that Wyn, the man who had studied all
this thoroughly, apparently didn't understand what I meant. It just
goes to show that he must have been right, when he said the future is
as fixed as the past.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took Wyn four years to get his equipment ready for a test. He
explained to me what it was supposed to do, but I never did get more
than a general idea of the principle involved. The heart of the thing
was a heavily wired chamber in the basement.

"The human body can take a lot of electricity, if it's administered in
the right way," he said. "If it's administered in the wrong way, you've
electrocuted somebody.

"I still don't know whether I've probed the secrets of the space-time
fabric deeply enough to make this work, but I think it will reverse
the charge of every atomic particle in the body of whatever is in that
cubicle. I'm going to put a cat in it, as our first time-traveler.

"We may turn up with a cat and an anti-cat, the latter traveling
backward in time. We may end with no cat at all. If so, maybe we've
created an anti-cat in the past or maybe we've just electrocuted a cat."

"I don't see how you expect to interpret your results," I commented
drily.

"If there's no cat, I won't risk it," he answered. "If we double our
cats, I think we're on the way to something that may help Summer."

We picked our way through the mess of wiring and went upstairs. He had
torn my bookcases out of one wall of the den and installed a control
board with a television screen where the fireplace had been.

"The experiment will be controlled from here," he said. "The energies
that are going to run around all over the basement would make it
pretty dangerous for anyone down there. I'm sorry you can't watch, but
somebody's got to keep the children away from here."

When he said "children," he meant Summer and Mark. Summer now looked as
much a twin to her nine-year-old son as she had looked to her husband
when I first saw them. At the last two Christmases, we had bought toys
for both of them, and she played happily with Mark. She called Wyn
"daddy" and me "Uncle Don," just as Mark did.

Making them look even more like twins as we entered the living room on
the day of Wyn's experiment was the fact that they were dressed alike.
She wore a pair of Mark's overalls, and both had on T-shirts.

At the moment, the two were trying to put doll clothes on Thomas, the
stray yellow cat Wyn had picked up for his experiment. We had had
Thomas about six months now. Wyn and I had dubbed the animal "Tom,"
unaware of its sex--it had borne kittens during its stay with us--but
the children thought the cat too dignified for the nickname. It was,
except when they were trying out their various original ideas on it.

"Thomas is our first heroine--or martyr," said Wyn, and swept the cat
up from the floor. Over the protests of the children, he stripped off
the doll clothing. "You youngsters go out on the side lawn and play.
Uncle Don will take care of you for a while."

Caring for the children had been my chore for so long I was accustomed
to the peculiarities involved. Mark was as much a problem as any
normal, active boy--no more. But Summer's reverse living, her reverse
memory, made her even more difficult to deal with as she reverted to
childish habits and attitudes.

For some weeks now, she had indulged in the fantasy that she was Mark
and Mark was she, a game Mark rebelled at strenuously. At the same
time, her manner of speaking had become so confused and tangled that
it was often incoherent. If Wyn failed in his experiment, the next nine
years threatened to be trying indeed.

The children left the house with me docilely enough, but as soon as we
reached the lawn Mark burst into tears.

"What's the matter with you, young fellow?" I asked in surprise.

"What's Daddy going to do to Thomas?" he demanded. "Daddy's going to
hurt Thomas!"

"Don't worry, Thomas isn't going to be hurt," I reassured him, aware
that I might not be telling the truth.

The boy looked at me straight.

"I know what a martyr is," he said indignantly, his sobs subsiding. "I
studied Joan of Arc in school."

"Daddy ... Thomas in big furnace put," Summer informed us in her
labored fashion. "Thomas all burnt up was going to. Him ... but I him
saved. Saved him, Summer and I."

"Neither one of you is going to do anything about Thomas right now,"
I said brusquely, recognizing Summer's use of the past tense as an
expression of intention. "When Daddy's through with Thomas, you may
play with him again."

Mark subsided, but he retained on his face a rebellious expression
which had by now become familiar to me. Summer, although she said
nothing for a few moments, became more excited. She alternately flushed
and paled, breathing hard, until I began to fear she was ill.

Now a deep, powerful hum arose from the house. Wyn had switched on the
power and was ready for his experiment.

It was a tremendous volume of sound, a physical thing that throbbed
through the ground under our feet and caused the leaves of the trees to
tremble as in a breeze. An electric tension filled the air and seemed
to intensify Summer's agitation. Her eyes dilated in fright and her
teeth began to chatter.

"Away got I but!" she cried suddenly in a shrill voice. "Up blew it
before away ran he and Thomas saved I! Me with up blew it and fire of
full furnace big a was it! Furnace a in Thomas had they!"

"Here, child!" I shouted above the increasing roar of the generators.
"You're hysterical. Nothing's going to happen to Thomas."

She quieted abruptly, glaring at Mark in affright. He stared back,
equally alarmed.

"He isn't, Summer he's?" she asked me plaintively. "Boy a be Summer
could how? Mark I'm know I."

I didn't understand this at all, especially when Summer began feeling
her arms and legs and inspecting herself all over, carefully.

The sound of the machinery in the basement reached a shrieking
crescendo that must have put the teeth of everyone in the neighborhood
on edge. Mark came to life. His eyes shining fiercely, he grasped
Summer by the arm.

"Are they going to hurt Thomas?" he demanded intently. "Are they,
Summer?"

She looked at me, not the boy, and suddenly she was calm as though in
the grip of profound shock. I could hardly hear her quiet, childish
voice through the noise from the basement.

"Where ... know ... don't," she began haltingly. "Gone ... Summer's
but. Furnace the in him had they. Thomas saved I."

Her voice trailed to a gurgle and then she began to chant, "Burn Thomas
burn Thomas burn Thomas...."

The boy suddenly broke from her and began to run for the house.

And, BACKWARD, she ran after him.

Caught by surprise, it was a moment before I could gather my wits and
follow, shouting at them. They had disappeared around the corner of
the house, and I rounded it in time to see them tug open the outside
basement door and vanish inside. An eerie blue light flickered from the
open door.

Trying to run too fast, I tripped over the garden hose and fell. I got
to my feet, momentarily dazed.

The explosion knocked me flat on my back, blinded by the flash that
burst from the basement windows and through the cracking walls.

The blast tilted the den up from the bottom. Its metal and concrete
floor, reinforced for the experiment, buckled but remained unbroken,
like a giant slide. Down that slide, through the smashed walls, Wyn
catapulted, to fall unhurt into the grass.

But the rest of the house crumpled in on the basement and caught fire.
Under the blazing piles of ruins, I could only surmise, were trapped
the children, both mother and son.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wept frantically. At my age, I must have been a pitiful spectacle.
Neighbors put their arms around my shoulders, tried to comfort me.

In contrast, Wyn was remarkably calm as he reported to Gus Adams.

"Every precaution was taken, Mr. Adams," he said, staring morosely into
the smoking embers of the house. "Both of them ran into the basement
just before the explosion. There was nothing anyone could do after
that."

"Too bad, Mr. Storm, to lose your wife and son all at once," said Gus
sympathetically, writing in his report book. We had kept Summer pretty
well concealed behind the high board fence in recent years, so few
people were aware of her retrogression. "If there's anything I can do
to help, let me know."

I upbraided Wyn for his apparent callousness when we got to a room at
the City Hotel.

"You may be right," he said. "But, first, I want to know something."

He had me relate to him everything that had transpired with the
children after we left the house. He made me repeat several points and
questioned me closely. He was interested particularly in what Summer
had said, how she had said it and how she had acted. The whole thing
was so clearly impressed on my mind, as it is today, that I'm sure I
made few errors.

"Well," he said, when I had finished, "we'll never see either of them
again, but I think I can say definitely they weren't killed in that
explosion."

"I don't see how you can say that!" I exclaimed.

"You remember what I told you--that if Summer's existence had been
reversed in time after she was born, she was existing somewhere else at
the same time? Living normally as a younger child in one place, and as
we knew her in reverse?"

I did remember it.

"Well, she was. But we thought she'd be a girl in both instances. When
her time direction was reversed, so was her sex. _Mark and Summer were
the same person!_"

I gasped. Wyn took a piece of hotel stationery from the rickety desk
and scratched a zigzag on it with his pen. It was a figure like the one
he had drawn in the library of our home, except that the top arm of
this Z was very short.

He labelled the top arm of the Z "Mark," and the diagonal "Summer."

"My mistake was that I thought my energy explosion would be at B,
throwing Summer back into a normal time direction. Instead, it was at
A, reversing the time direction of Mark's existence: and the reversed
Mark was Summer."

"But Mark was Summer's son." I exclaimed.

"Curious, isn't it?" he agreed, smiling strangely. "She gave birth to
herself, like the phoenix. Nor is that all. She conceived herself!"

With a firm hand, he wrote "Wyn" above the bottom arm of the Z!

The diagram looked like this:

           MARK
         --------
                /EXPLOSION
               /
              /
             /SUMMER
            /
           /
          /    WYN
    STORM ------------

"The re-reversal!" His blue eyes were a little self conscious as they
looked at me now. "Don, I was born Mark Storm. This explosion today
reversed my time direction and I became Summer Storm, to give birth
to myself nine years ago. And in a terrific burst of natural energy
that you yourself saw, a crucible so fiery that it could wrench the
very inner fabric and physical form of the body, the time flow for me
was twisted back to its proper direction that night in the park and I
became myself--to father myself six years later!

"I was my mother. I am my own father and my own son!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There it is. Wyn believes he sprang from nothingness, from himself.
Amid the wreckage of the laws of cause and effect that this whole thing
involves, it's possible, I suppose. But a couple of details still
bother me, details I haven't mentioned to Wyn.

Oh, it isn't the coincidences. If the future is fixed as is the past,
they wouldn't necessarily be coincidences: things like Summer--in the
reversed time in which she lived--stripping off her clothes, donning
Gus Adams' raincoat over her nakedness and going with us out to the
park, to that rendezvous with the lightning and Wyn.

One of the details I can't take is that it's hard to believe that,
even in such strange twistings and turnings of time, any creature
can initiate itself and, in effect, spring from nothing--though Wyn
says it's done at the sub-atomic level in simple terms of conversion
of energy to matter. But how about the fact that such a complicated
creature as man is built by the action of the genes and chromosomes?

The other is that year that I was Summer's lover. If she was living
backward biologically, wouldn't that apply, too, to the growth of an
unborn child while it was still part of her. And Wyn left Allertown
right after Mark's birth.

I've heard of virgin mothers. I'd rather believe in a "virgin father"
than human creation from nothingness.

I once had hair, and it was blond. My eyes are blue. I look in the
mirror, and then I look at Wyn lounging at ease behind his newspaper.

My son? My motherless son?





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Z, by Charles L. Fontenay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK Z ***

***** This file should be named 59515.txt or 59515.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/5/1/59515/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

