The Project Gutenberg Etext of Quotations of Oliver W. Holmes, Sr.
DW#05 in our series of Widger's Quotations by David Widger

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the laws for your country before redistributing these files!!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.

Please do not remove this.

This should be the first thing seen when anyone opens the book.
Do not change or edit it without written permission.  The words
are carefully chosen to provide users with the information they
need about what they can legally do with the texts.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**
*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541

As of 12/12/00 contributions are only being solicited from people in:
Colorado, Connecticut, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Montana,
Nevada, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Texas, Vermont, and Wyoming.

As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising
will begin in the additional states.  Please feel
free to ask to check the status of your state.

International donations are accepted,
but we don't know ANYTHING about how
to make them tax-deductible, or
even if they CAN be made deductible,
and don't have the staff to handle it
even if there are ways.

These donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109


Title: Widger's Quotations from the Works of Oliver W. Holmes, Sr.

Author: David Widger

Release Date: October, 2002  [Etext #3493]
[Yes, we are about one year ahead of schedule]
[The actual date this file first posted = 05/14/01]

Edition: 10

Language: English

The Project Gutenberg Etext of Widger's Quotations
from the Works of Oliver W. Holmes, Sr., by David Widger
*******This file should be named 3493.txt or 3493.zip******

This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our books one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to send us error messages even years after
the official publication date.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net
http://promo.net/pg


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can surf to them as follows, and just download by date; this is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext02
or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext02

Or /etext01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release fifty new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 3000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

Presently, contributions are only being solicited from people in:
Colorado, Connecticut, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Montana,
Nevada, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Texas, Vermont, and Wyoming.

As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising
will begin in the additional states.

These donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109


Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541,
has been approved as a 501(c)(3) organization by the US Internal
Revenue Service (IRS).  Donations are tax-deductible to the extent
permitted by law.  As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising will begin in the
additional states.

All donations should be made to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation.  Mail to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Avenue
Oxford, MS 38655-4109  [USA]


We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


***


Example command-line FTP session:

ftp ftp.ibiblio.org
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99 or etext00 through etext02, etc.
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

**END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.08.01*END**
[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS

FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG
WORKS OF OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES




CONTENTS:

The Autocrat at the Breakfast Table ........ [Etext #751]  aofbt10.txt
The Professor at the Breakfast Table ....... [Etext #2665] prabt10.txt
The Poet at the Breakfast Table ............ [Etext #2666] ptabt10.txt
Over the Teacups ........................... [Etext #2689] teacp10.txt
Elsie Venner ............................... [Etext #2696] elsie10.txt
The Guardian Angel ......................... [Etext #2697] angel10.txt
A Mortal Antipathy ......................... [Etext #2698] antip10.txt
Passages from an Old Volume of Life ........ [Etext #2706] pages10.txt
Medical Essays ............................. [Etext #2700] medic10.txt
The Entire Gutenberg Files of Holmes ....... [Etext #3252] ohent10.txt





                              EDITOR'S NOTE

Readers well acquainted with the works of Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes
may wish to see if their favorite passages are listed in this
selection.  The etext editor will be glad to add your suggestions.
One of the advantages of internet over paper publication is the ease
of quick revision.

All the titles  may be found using the Project Gutenberg search engine:

                     http://promo.net/pg/

After downloading a specific file, the location and complete context of
the quotations  may be found by inserting a small part of the quotation
into the 'Find' or 'Search' functions of the user's word processing
program.

The quotations are in two formats:
     1. Small passages from the text.
     2. A list alphabetized of one-liners.

The editor may be contacted at <widger@cecomet.net> for comments,
questions or suggested additions to these extracts.

D.W.





                           WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS



THE AUTOCRAT AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE
(Originally published at Project Gutenberg by David Price)
[Etext #751] aofbt10.txt or aofbt10.zip

A little queer and uncertain in general aspect.
A misprint kills a sensitive author
A nail will pick a lock that defies hatchet and hammer
Absolute, peremptory facts are bullies
Advised every literary man to have a profession.
Afraid of books who have not handled them from infancy
Age and neglect united gradually
Agreed on certain ultimata of belief
Algebraic symbols of minds which have grown too weak
All his geese are swans
All men are bores, except when we want them
All men love all women
All the forms of moral excellence, except truth
All want to reach old age and grumble when they get it
And now we two are walking the long path in peace together
Another privilege of talking is to misquote
Arc in the movement of a large intellect
As a child, he should have tumbled about in a library
As I understand truth
As to clever people's hating each other
Asked Solon what made him dare to be so obstinate
Assume a standard of judgment in our own minds
At the mercy of every superior mind
Audacious self-esteem, with good ground for it
Automatic and involuntary actions of the mind
Babbage's calculating machine
Be very careful to whom you trust one of these keys
Beautiful effects from wit,--all the prismatic colors
Been in the same precise circumstances before
Behave like men and gentlemen about it, if you know how.
Bells which small trades-people connect with their shop-doors
Better too few words, from the woman we love
Bill which will render pockets a superfluity in your next suit
Blank checks of intellectual bankruptcy
Bowing and nodding over the music
Brain often runs away with the heart's best blood
Brilliant flashes--of silence!
Brute beasts of the intellectual domain
Bury in it beliefs, doubts, dreams, hopes, and terrors
But it was in talking of Life that we came most nearly together
But we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.
C'est le DERNIER pas qui co–te
Called an old man for the first time
Cel… va sans dire
Character is distinctly shown at the age of  or  months.
Cigar
Clairvoyance which sees into things without opening them
Code of finalities is a necessary condition of profitable talk
Comfort is essential to enjoyment
Commerce is just putting his granite foot upon them
Common sense was good enough for him
Common sense, as you understand it.
Compare the racer with the trotter
Conceit has the virtue of making them cheerful
Conceit is just a natural thing to human minds
Conclusion that he or she is really dull
Consciousness of carrying a "settler" in the form of a fact
Controversy
Conversation which is suggestive rather than argumentative
Conversational blank checks or counters
Conversational bully
Conversational fungi spring up most luxuriantly
Conversational soprano
Creative action is not voluntary at all
Crippled souls
Crow with a king-bird after him
Cut your climate to your constitution
Dangerous subjects
Demand for intellectual labor is so enormous
Did I believe in love at first sight?
Differ on the fundamental principles
Dishwater from the washings of English dandyism
Disputing about remainders and fractions
Do you ever wonder why poets talk so much about flowers?
Do you know how important good jockeying is to authors?
Don't believe any man ever talked like that in this world
Don't ever think the poetry is dead in an old man
Don't make your moral staple consist of the negative virtues
Doomed to the pangs of an undeceived self-estimate
Dulness is not commonly a game fish
Easier to dispute it than to disprove it
Easier to say this than to prove it
Elysian abandonment of a huge recumbent chair.
Every person's feelings have a front-door and a side-door
Extra talent does sometimes make people jealous
Facts always yield the place of honor, in conversation
Few, if any, were ruined by drinking
Flash terms for words which truly characterize their objects.
Fortune had left her, sorrow had baptized her
Fortune is the measure of intelligence
Friendship authorizes you to say disagreeable things
Gambling with dice or stocks
Gambling, on the great scale, is not republican
Generally ruined before they became drunkards
Genius in an essentially common person is detestable
Gift of seeing themselves in the true light
Give it an intellectual shake and hold it up to the light
Give us the luxuries of life
Good Americans, when they die, go to Paris
Good feeling helps society to make liars of most of us
Good for nothing until they have been long kept and used
Got his hand up, as a pointer lifts his forefoot
Governed, not by, but according to laws
Grave without a stone where nothing but a man is buried
Great silent-moving misery puts a new stamp on us
Grow old early, if you would be old long
Grow we must, if we outgrow all that we love.
Habit is a labor-saving invention
Hard it is for some people to get out of a room
He that has once done you a kindness
He who is carried by horses must deal with rogues
Height of art to conceal art
Her breathing was somewhat hurried and high, or thoracic
Here lies buried the soul of the licentiate Pedro Garcias
Hire logic, in the shape of a lawyer
Hold their outspread hands over your head
Holes in all her pockets
Hoped he did deserve a little abuse occasionally
Hopelessly dull discourse acts inductively
How long will school-keeping take to kill you?
Hung with moss, looking like bearded Druids
Hydrostatic paradox of controversy
I allow no "facts " at this table
I always believed in life rather than in books
I always break down when folks cry in my face
I am my own son, as it seems to me
I had not thought love was ever meant for me.
I hate books
I have lived by the sea-shore and by the mountains
I have taken all knowledge to be my province
I love horses
I never think I have hit hard unless it rebounds
I replied with my usual forbearance
I show my thought, another his
I tell my secrets too easily when I am downhearted.
I think I have not been attacked enough for it
If I thought I should ever see the Alps!
If so and so, we should have been this or that
If they have run as well as they knew how!
Il faut ne pas BRUTALISER la machine
In what direction we are moving
Incipit Allegoria Senectutis.
Infinite ocean of similitudes and analogies
Insanity
Insanity is often the logic of an accurate mind overtasked
Intellectual companions can be found easily
Is this the mighty occan?--is this all?
It is by little things that we know ourselves
It is pleasant to be foolish at the right time
Judge men's minds by comparing with mine
Keep his wit in the background
Key to this side-door
Knowledge and timber only useful when seasoned
La main de fer sous le gant de velours
Laid the egg of the Reformation which Luther hatched
Laughs at times at the grand airs "Science" puts on
Law of the road with regard to handsome faces
Leading a string of my mind's daughters to market
Leap at a single bound into celebrity
Learn anything twice as easily as in my earlier days
Leave your friend to learn unpleasant truths from his enemies
Lecturer is public property
Let us cry!
Liability of all men to be elected to public office
Life is maintained by the respiration of oxygen and of sentiment
Life would be nothing without paper-credit
Like taking the cat in your lap after holding a squirrel
Listen to what others say about subjects you have studied
Little great man
Little muscle which knows its importance
Little narrow streaks of specialized knowledge
Live on the reputation of the reputation they might have made
Living in a narrow world of dry habits
Logic
Logicians carry the surveyor's chain over the track
Long illness is the real vampyrism
Look through the silvered rings of the arcus senilis!
Love is sparingly soluble in the words of men
Love must be either rich or rosy
Love-capacity is a congenital endowment
Lying is unprofitable
Made up your mind to do when you ask them for advice
Man is father to the boy that was
Man of family
Man who means to be honest for a literary pickpocket
Man's and a woman's dusting a library
Man's first life-story shall clean him out, so to speak
Mathematical fact
May doubt everything to-day if I will only do it civilly
Meaningless blushing
Mechanical invention had exhausted itself
Memory is a net
Men are fools, cowards, and liars all at once
Men grow sweet a little while before they begin to decay
Men of facts wait their turn in grim silence
Men that it weakens one to talk with an hour
Men that know everything except how to make a living
Men who have found new occupations when growing old
Might have hired an EARTHQUAKE for less money!
Moralist and occasional sermonizer
Most of our common, working beliefs are probabilities
Moved as if all her articulations were elbow-joints
Much ashamed of some people for retaining their reason
Must be weaned from his late suppers now
Must not read such a string of verses too literally
Must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it
Napoleon's test
Nature dresses and undresses them
Nature, who always has her pockets full of seeds
Nearest approach to flying that man has ever made
Neither make too much of flaws or overstatements
Never forget where they have put their money
No fresh truth ever gets into a book
No man knows his own voice
Nobody is so old he doesn't think he can live a year
Nutritious diet of active sympathetic benevolence
Oblivion as residuary legatee
Oblivion's Uncatalogued Library
Odious trick of speech or manners must be got rid of.
Oh, so patient she is, this imperturbable Nature!
Old Age
Old age appear as a series of personal insults and indignities
Old jokes are dynamometers of mental tension
One can generally tell these wholesale thieves easily enough
One doesn't like to be cruel,--and yet one hates to lie
One that goes in a nurse may come out an angel
One very sad thing in old friendships
Open patches where the sun gets in and goes to sleep
Oracle
Original, though you have uttered it a hundred times
Ought to produce insanity in every well-regulated mind
Our brains are seventy-year clocks
Overrate their own flesh and blood
Painted there by reflection from our faces
Passion never laughs
People in the green stage of millionism
People that make puns are like wanton boys
Person is really full of information, and does not abuse it
Personal incidents that call up single sharp pictures
Physical necessity to talk out what is in the mind
Plagiarism
Pluck survives stamina
Poem must be kept and used, like a meersehaum, or a violin
Poetry of words is quite as beautiful as that of sentences
Poetry, instead of making one other heart happy
Poor creature that does not often repeat himself
Poverty is evidence of limited capacity
Power of human beings is a very strictly limited agency
Power of music
Pride, in the sense of contemning others
Probabilities
Project a principle full in the face of obvious fact!
Provincial conceit, which some of us must plead guilty to.
Pun is primƒ facie an insult
Put coppers on the railroad-tracks
Qu'est ce qu'il a fait?  What has he done?
Racing horses are essentially gambling implements
Rapidity with which ideas grow old in our memories
Rather longer than usual dressing that morning
Rather meet three of the scowlers than one of the smilers.
Regained my freedom with a sigh
Religious mental disturbances
Remarkably intelligent audience
Remarks like so many postage-stamps
Returning thanks after a dinner of many courses
Ribbon which has strangled so many false pretensions
Sad thing to be born a sneaking fellow
Saddle-leather is in some respects even preferable
Saturation-point of each mind differs from that of every other
Scientific certainty has no spring in it
Scientific knowledge
Second story projecting
See if the ripe fruit were better or worse
Self-assertion, such as free suffrage introduces
Self-made men?
Self-unconsciousness of genius
Sense of SMELL
"Settler" in the form of a fact or a revolver
Several false premises
Shake the same bough again
She who nips off the end of a brittle courtesy
SIN has many tools, but a lie is the handle which fits them all
Six persons engaged in every dialogue between two
Small potatoes always get to the bottom.
Smiling at present follies
So much must be pardoned to humanity
So much woman in it,--muliebrity, as well as femineity
Society is a strong solution of books
Society of Mutual Admiration
Sold his sensibilities
Somebody had been calling him an old man
Something better than flowers; it is a seed-capsule
Something she is ashamed of, or ought to be.
Somewhere,-- somewhere,--love is in store for them
Stages of life
Stupidity often saves a man from going mad
Style is the man
Sudden conviction that I had seen it somewhere
Talk about those subjects you have had long in your mind
Talkers who have what may be called jerky minds
Talking is like playing on the harp
Talking is one of the fine arts
Talking shapes our thoughts for us
Talking with a dull friend affords great relief
Tears that we weep inwardly with unchanging features
Temptation of money and fame is too great for young people
Tepid and unstimulating expression of enthusiasm
Terrible smile
Thanklessness of critical honesty
That great procession of the UNLOVED
The Amen! of Nature is always a flower
The house is quite as much the body we live in
The race that shortens its weapons lengthens its boundaries
The schoolmistress had tried life, too
The way to argue down a vice is not to tell lies about it
The year eighteen hundred and ever-so-few
Their business is not a matter of sympathy, but of intellect
There is a higher law in grammar, not to be put down
There is almost always at least one key to this side-door
There is no elasticity in a mathematical fact
Think of the griefs that die unspoken!
Think only in single file front this day forward
Third vowel as its center
This is one of those cases in which the style is the man
This is the shortest way,--she said
Those who ask your opinion really want your praise
Time is a fact
To pay up, to own up, and to shut up, if beaten
To trifle with the vocabulary
Too late!---- "It might have been."----Amen!
Travellers change their guineas, but not their characters
Triumph of the ciphering hand-organ
True state of creative genius is allied to reverie, or dreaming
Truth must roll, or nobody can do anything with it
Truth's  sharp corners get terribly rounded
Truths a man carries about with him are his tools
Turn over any old falsehood
Unadorned and in plain calico
Undertakers
Unpacks and unfolds incidental illustrations
Unpretending mediocrity is good
Virtually old when it first makes its appearance
Virtue passed through the hem of their parchment
Virtues of a sporting man
Vulgarism of language
Wait awhile!
Walls of that larger Inquisition which we call Civilization
Want of ideas, want of words, want of manners
We always compare ourselves with our contemporaries.
We are all theological students
We carry happiness into our condition
We die out of houses, just as we die out of our bodies
We don't read what we don't like
We never tell our secrets to people that pump for them.
Wedded, faded away, threw themselves away
Wedding-ring conveys a right to a key to this side-door
Weeded their circle pretty well of these unfortunates
What a satire, by the way, is that machine
What are the great faults of conversation?
Whether anything can be conscious of its own flavor??
Whether gifted with the accident of beauty or not
While she is silent, Nature is working for her
Who is in advance of it or even with it
Wholesale professional dealers in misfortune
Why authors and actors are ashamed of being funny?
Why did I not ask? you will say
Will you take the long path with me?
Winning-post a slab of white or gray stone
Wit knows that his place is at the tail of a procession.
Wonder how my great trees are coming on this summer.
World calls him hard names, probably
World has a million roosts for a man, but only one nest.
Yes, I am a man, like another
Youth and age--something in the soul





THE PROFESSOR AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE
[Etext #2665] prabt10.txt or prabt10.zip

Anonymous defamation, putting lies into people's mouths
Answer him not
Apologizing --A very desperate habit
Apology is only egotism wrong side out
Celibacy of the clergy
Chose a plain one, that keeps good time, and that is all
Consolations of religion
Conversational non-combatants
Didn't know Truth was such an invalid
Essence of genius is truthfulness, contact with realities
Faith dislikes being meddled with
Fear of open discussion implies feebleness
Genius
Good many coarse people in both callings
Happy to agree with all their beliefs, if that were possible
Hardness in surgeons, just as there is in theologians
Hating ourselves as we hate our neighbors
Humility is the first of the virtues--for other people
I can't afford to pay quite so much as that even for peace
I will not die with a lie rattling in my throat
Inclination of two persons with a strong affinity
Intellectual non-combatant
It is so hard to prove a negative
Let him be patient with an opinion he does not accept
Life becomes to them as death and death as life
List of things that everybody says and nobody thinks
List of things that everybody thinks and nobobody says
Lurch to quackery, owing to their very loose way of evidence
Meddling with things that can take care of themselves
Most persons have died before they expire
No company of craftsmen that did not need sharp looking after
Nobody talks much that does n't say unwise things
Not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth
Notion of private property in truth
Only condition of peace in this world is to have no ideas
Opinions
Out of plumb when they sit side by side
Overestimate of our special individuality
Pathological piety
Perpetual insult to mediocrity
Plenty of praying rogues and swearing saints in the world
Presumption in favor of any particular belief
Pseudo-science
Question everything
Saying one thing about it and believing another
Spiritualism
Surfeits of pathological piety
Talk, to me, is only spading up the ground for crops of thought
Talked as if I believed what I said
The dead-living
Took it for granted that he and his crowd were right
Torturing of dying people
Truth is tough.  It will not break, like a bubble
Truth never goeth without a scratcht face
Way the pseudo-sciences go to work
Wholesale moral arrangements are so different from retail
Whoso offers me any article of belief for my signature
Wider the intellect, the larger and simpler the expressions
Wisdom is the abstract of the past
Woman fascinates a man quite as often by what she overlooks
Would you stand still in fly-time, or would you give a kick





THE POET AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE
[Etext #2666] ptabt10.txt or ptabt10.zip

Age magnifies and aggravates persons out of due proportion
Allowed a set of monks to pull their hoods over our eyes
Associates facts by their accidental cohesion
Authority
Dogmatists
Don't like the word tolerant
Earnest
Emptied me of all my voluntary laughter
Enthusiasm for something that makes a life worth looking at
Enthusiast
Epicure in words
Ever-ending and ever-beginning stories
Fore-stick and the back-log of ancient days
How does she go to work to help you?  -- Why, she listens
I talk half the time to find out my own thoughts
If he knows anything, knows how little he knows
Intellectual myopia
Inventory of my faculties as calmly as if I were an appraiser
It is a woman's business to please
Knowledge--it excites prejudices to call it science
Life is a fatal complaint
Minds tossing on the unquiet waves of doubt
More science he has the worse for his patient
Most of us hope and many of us believe we shall
Must not roughly smash other people's idols
Never saw the man that couldn't teach me something
Pedantry, triviality, and the kind of partial blindness
Poetry is not an article of prime necessity, and potatoes are
Poets who never write verses
Privilege of wisdom to listen
Province of knowledge to speak
Question these charming old people before it is too late
Rather too anxious that I should be comfortable
Rounded back, convex with years of stooping over his minute work
Said something which another had often felt but never said
Satisfaction to the curious practitioner
Science without common sense
Scientific specialization
"Sentimentality," which is sentiment overdone
She always laughs and cries in the right places
Some people that think everything pitiable is so funny
Takes very little to spoil everything for writer, talker, lover
There is nothing I do not question
Two sides to everybody, as there are to that piece of money
Vacuous countenances
Virtues of her deceased spouse
We never need fear that he will undervalue himself
What have I to do with time, but to fill it up with labor?
What you hate in him is chiefly misfortune
Wholesale thinker who handles knowledge by the cargo
Young surgeon, old physician





OVER THE TEACUPS
[Etext #2689] teacp10.txt or teacp10.zip

Acquiescence is the best of palliations
All of our brains squint more or less
Alternations of overvaluation and undervaluation of ourselves
At sixty we come "within range of the rifle-pits
Blessed are those who have said our good things for us
Cavil on the ninth part of a hair
Cerebral strabismus
Childishness to expect men to believe as their fathers did
Consciousness is covered by layers of habitual thoughts
Content to remain more or less ignorant of many things
Controversialists
Cracked Teacup
Cultivated symptoms as other people cultivate roses
Curve of health
Difference in the extreme limits of life--little
Do not be bullied out of your common sense by the specialist
Do wish she would get well--or something
Endure philosophically what we cannot help
Enormous appetite for Old World titles of distinction
Envy not the old man the tranquillity of his existence
Every age has to shape the Divine image it worships over again
General practitioner submits to a servitude
Great privilege of old age was the getting rid of responsibility
Habits are the crutches of old age
He did not know so much about old age then as he does now
Hoard your life as a miser hoards his money
Homo unius libri--the man of one book
Hypocrisy of kind-hearted people
I dressed his wound, and God cured him
I told you so
Intellectual Over-Feeding and its consequence, Mental Dyspepsia
It is time to be old,  To take in sail
Know enough of a wide range of subjects
Know something about everything, and everything about something
Less you think about your health the better
Man who knows too much about one particular subject
Nature's kindly anodyne
Never contradict a man with a squinting brain
Never to countenance a wrong because others did
No patience with any form of deceit or duplicity
Old Men's Tears
Old people have a right to be epicures, if they can afford it
Old women of both sexes
Outlived their usefulness
Persons with a strong instinctive tendency to contradiction
Pitying kindness
Pleasure to mediocrity to have its superiors brought in range
Presumptions
Rapture of self-admiration
Reached and passed the natural limit of serviceable years
Remember past happiness in the hour of misery
Sentenced to capital punishment for the crime of living
Squinting brains
Sufficient, not too much exercise
Tobacco, a soothing drug
Trespasser on the domain belonging to another generation
Truth is lost in its own excess
Unconscious plagiarism
Vieille fille fait jeune mariee
Voice that makes friends of everybody
Wants nothing but a bald spot and a wife
We must drop much of our foliage before winter is upon us
Weak-eyed fountain feebly weeping over its own insignificance
When one watches for symptoms, every organ in the body is ready
When we think we are thinking
With an effort that we admit a new author into the inner circle
World was a garden to me then; it is a churchyard now
Writer telling them something they have long known or felt
Young Doctor, waiting for his bald spot to come





ELSIE VENNER
[Etext #2696] elsie10.txt or elsie10.zip

All of us are more or less imaginative in our theology
Appetite should be at war with no other purse than his own
Attacks of spiritual neuralgia
Bare hook and a coarse line are all that is needed
Be polite and generous, but don't undervalue yourself
Beliefs must be lived in for a good while
Confession of weakness which does not wish to be strong
Conscience itself requires a conscience
Constituency of mediocrities of which the world is made up
Cowardice may call for our most lenient judgment
Criticise other people's modes of dealing with their children
Despair itself would have been like an anodyne
Don't begin to pry till you have got the long arm on your side
Educational factory
Fall silent and think they are thinking
Habits, which take the place of self-determination
Happiest of souls, if lethargy is bliss
He almost lived in his library
I dressed his wound and God healed him
Judged the hearts of others by his own
Leverage is everything
Makes men imperious to sit a horse
Matrimonial alliance, and a family of half a dozen children
Means at least as much as he says
Measles  Mumps  And Sin,--that's always catching
Millstone round their necks, taking it for a life-preserver?
Mistake spiritual selfishness for sanctity
Not quite dead enough to bury
Old Doctor did not believe in medicine
One angry man is as good as another
One of her "I think it's sos" is worth the Bible-oath
Outside observers see results; parents see processes
Passive endurance is the hardest trial
Priests that had no wives and no children, or none to speak of
Shy of asking questions of those who know enough to destroy
Slow to accept marvellous stories and many forms of superstition
So long as a woman can talk, there is nothing she cannot bear
Some people think that truth and gold are always to be washed for
Swap him for a `yallah dog,'--and then shoot the dog
Talked cautiously, feeling his way for sympathy
Taste of everything he carried in his saddlebags
Thin film of some emotional non-conductor between them
Treat bad men exactly as if they were insane
Tremulous movement of the muscles, which was worse than silence
We forget that weakness is not in itself a sin
We must have headway on, or there will be no piloting her
What a miserable thing it is to be poor
Why did n't I warn him about love and all that nonsense?
Widow Rowens was now in the full bloom of ornamental sorrow





THE GUARDIAN ANGEL
[Etext #2697] angel10.txt or angel10.zip

Alas!  her simple words were true,--he had grown away from her
Been afraid since to like almost anything
Cold shower-bath the world furnishes gratis
Conflicting advice of all manner of officious friends
Don't be in a hurry to choose your friends
Dreaded mingling with the brawlers of the market-place
Easy-crying widows take new husbands soonest
Getting married is jumping overboard
Grief must be fed with thought, or starve to death
Her only fault was that she had not grown with him
I am old and incombustible enough to be trusted
"I cannot help it"--the hysteric motto
Knew how to keep his knowledge to himself upon occasion
Library gathered like his is a looking-glass
Live folks are only dead folks warmed over
Love does not thrive without hope
Mechanical plodders and the indifferent routinists
Most pathetic image in the world to many women - own tears
Not handicapped with any burdensome ideals
Nothing so humble that taste cannot be shown in it
Patronized, which is not a pleasant feeling
Picket-guard at the extreme outpost
Saint may be a sinner that never got down to "hard pan"
Talk without words is half their conversation
Truth is only safe when diluted
Turning bread and milk into the substance of little sinners
War--Organized barbarism





A MORTAL ANTIPATHY
[Etext #2698] antip10.txt or antip10.zip

Beginners are very apt to make what they think are discoveries
Charlatanism always hobbles on two crutches
Doctor's wife must keep her tongue in
Dying, whose eyes may light up, but rarely shed a tear
Knows everything and doesn't believe anything
Lecturing to instruct myself
Lucky mishaps, or, more elegantly, fortunate calamities
Man who knows what is in books - and what is in men
Medicine deals chiefly in probabilities
Nervous revolutions
Never know the extent of darkness until it is partially illuminated
Others took assertions on trust
Perhaps I sha'n't believe in medicine enough to practise it
Persons who never are young--and never old
Physicians, of all men in the world, know how to wait
Sagacity without which learning is a mere incumbrance
Self-indulging and self-commiserating emotionalism
Self-love is a cup without any bottom
Shut out, not all light, but all the light they do not want
Struggle with the ever-rising mists of delusion
Tender spot of one or the other is carelessly handled
Theological students developed a third eyelid
What has the public to do with my private affairs
When gratitude is a bankrupt, love only can pay his debts





PASSAGES FROM AN OLD VOLUME OF LIFE
[Etext #2706] pages10.txt or pages10.zip

Accustomed to tread carefully among the parts of speech
Are a dozen additional spasms worth living for?
Fiat voluntas MEA,--let my will be done
Grief borne as men bear it, felt as women feel it
Guides have queer notions occasionally
He smiled an official smile
Ill health gives a certain common character to all faces
It was suggested that it might shorten life
Locomotive intoxication
Man is essentially an idolater
New discomfort in place of an old comfort is often a luxury
Officials become brutalized, I suppose, as a matter of course
Patients are not the property of their physicians
Philanthropists are commonly grave, occasionally grim
Prediction seems to stand in need of an extension
Prophecies
Prophesy as much as you like, but always hedge
Teach the ignorance of what people do not want to know
Timid compromisers
We are all egotists in sickness and debility
Weakness had made him querulous





MEDICAL ESSAYS
[Etext #2700] medic10.txt or medic10.zip

A man's ignorance is his private property
Affectation vital to the well-being of society
All these medications are, prima facie, injurious
All they want is to be let alone
An analogy is not an explanation
Argumentum ad ignorantiam
Assuming a falsehood as a fact, and giving reasons for it
At any rate it can do no harm
Bedside is always the true centre of medical teaching
Beliefs are rooted in human wants and weakness, and die hard
Better for mankind,--and all the worse for the fishes
Bewitching cup of self-quackery
C'est magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la guerre
Coincidences
Colossal system of self-deception
Community is still overdosed
Confound belief with evidence
Congenital incapacity for life
Count the pulse; also note the time of day
Counting only their favorable cases
Cut all their throats, sweetly
Diseases get well without being "cured,"
Dislike whatever shakes the dust out of their traditions
Drugs should always be regarded as evils
Dullest of teachers is the one who does not know what to omit
Earned your money by the dose you have taken
Exception of opium, wine, specifics, and anaesthetics
Express your opinions freely; defend them rarely
Extra price for gilding his rich patients' pills
Extravagance in remedies and trust in remedies
False appetite in many intelligences
Fearless in the face of authority
Find most of the old beliefs alive amongst us to-day
Flippant loquacity of half knowledge
Follies and inanities, imposing on the credulous
Futility of attempting to silence this asserted science
Generalize the disease and individualize the patient
Half knowledge dreads nothing but whole knowledge
Half-censure divided between the parties
I am too much in earnest for either humility or vanity
Ignorance is a solemn and sacred fact
Imperative demand of patients and their friends
Invectives against such as dared to doubt the dogmas
Kept extreme remedies for extreme cases
Logical errors
Loud outcry on a slight touch reveals the weak spot
Medical Jounals must find something to fill their columns
Medical logic which does not seem to have been taught
Medicines proper, which hurts a well man, hurts a sick one
Much as you know, something is still left for you to learn
Mutual respect of which outward courtesy is the sign
Natural incapacity for sound observation
No families take so little medicine as those of doctors
None of my business to inquire what other persons think
One whose patients are willing to die in his hands
Opium, which the Creator himself seems to prescribe
Over-medication are to a great extent masked by disease
Pegs to hang facts upon
Physician and the disease entered, hand in hand
Point of mental saturation
Post hoc ergo propter hoc error
Presumption in favor of poisoning
Presumption is always against treatments
Pretensions of presumptuous ignorance
Pseudological inanity
Public itself, which insists on being poisoned
Quackery and idolatry are all but immortal
Qui a bu, boira
Rapid rotation of scientific crops
Save all our old treasures of knowledge and mine deeply for new
Sick must have somewhat wherewith to busy their thoughts
Single combats between dead authors and living housemaids
Singular inability to weigh the value of testimony
Special gift of the man born for a teacher
Student must not be led away by the seduction of knowledge
Sweeping statistical documents
Take down your sign, or never put it up
The withered branch of science: medicine
They are not well if they do not have them
Time is a very elastic element in Geology and Prophecy
True meaning of the word "cure"
Trust more in nature and less in their plans of interference
Ubi tres medici, duo athei
Vast community of quacks, with or without the diploma
Vowed these gifts to the altar, and the gods saved them
Vulgar love of paradox
Where knowledge leaves off and ignorance begins
Whether they had better live at all
Why we teach so much that is not practical
Wise enough to confess the fact of absolute ignorance
Words that few understand and most will shortly forget
Yielding to the tendency to self-delusion
Young man knows the rules, but the old man knows the exceptions





THE ENTIRE GUTENBERG FILES OF HOLMES
[Etext #3252] ohent10.txt or ohent10.zip

A nail will pick a lock that defies hatchet and hammer
A little queer and uncertain in general aspect.
A misprint kills a sensitive author
Absolute, peremptory facts are bullies
Advised every literary man to have a profession.
Afraid of books who have not handled them from infancy
Age and neglect united gradually
Agreed on certain ultimata of belief
Algebraic symbols of minds which have grown too weak
All his geese are swans
All men are bores, except when we want them
All men love all women
All the forms of moral excellence, except truth
All want to reach old age and grumble when they get it
And now we two are walking the long path in peace together
Another privilege of talking is to misquote
Arc in the movement of a large intellect
As I understand truth
As to clever people's hating each other
As a child, he should have tumbled about in a library
Asked Solon what made him dare to be so obstinate
Assume a standard of judgment in our own minds
At the mercy of every superior mind
Audacious self-esteem, with good ground for it
Automatic and involuntary actions of the mind
Babbage's calculating machine
Be very careful to whom you trust one of these keys
Beautiful effects from wit,--all the prismatic colors
Been in the same precise circumstances before
Behave like men and gentlemen about it, if you know how.
Beliefs are rooted in human wants and weakness, and die hard
Bells which small trades-people connect with their shop-doors
Better for mankind,--and all the worse for the fishes
Better too few words, from the woman we love
Bewitching cup of self-quackery
Bill which will render pockets a superfluity in your next suit
Blank checks of intellectual bankruptcy
Bowing and nodding over the music
Brain often runs away with the heart's best blood
Brilliant flashes--of silence!
Brute beasts of the intellectual domain
Bury in it beliefs, doubts, dreams, hopes, and terrors
But we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.
But it was in talking of Life that we came most nearly together
C'est le DERNIER pas qui co–te
Called an old man for the first time
Character is distinctly shown at the age of four months.
Cigar
Clairvoyance which sees into things without opening them
Code of finalities is a necessary condition of profitable talk
Cold shower-bath the world furnishes gratis
Comfort is essential to enjoyment
Commerce is just putting his granite foot upon them
Common sense, as you understand it.
Common sense was good enough for him
Compare the racer with the trotter
Conceit is just a natural thing to human minds
Conceit has the virtue of making them cheerful
Conclusion that he or she is really dull
Conflicting advice of all manner of officious friends
Consciousness of carrying a "settler" in the form of a fact
Controversy
Conversation which is suggestive rather than argumentative
Conversational fungi spring up most luxuriantly
Conversational bully
Conversational blank checks or counters
Conversational soprano
Creative action is not voluntary at all
Crippled souls
Crow with a king-bird after him
Cut your climate to your constitution
Dangerous subjects
Demand for intellectual labor is so enormous
Did I believe in love at first sight?
Didn't know Truth was such an invalid
Differ on the fundamental principles
Dishwater from the washings of English dandyism
Disputing about remainders and fractions
Do wish she would get well--or something
Do you know how important good jockeying is to authors?
Do you ever wonder why poets talk so much about flowers?
Do not be bullied out of your common sense by the specialist
Don't make your moral staple consist of the negative virtues
Don't believe any man ever talked like that in this world
Don't begin to pry till you have got the long arm on your side
Don't ever think the poetry is dead in an old man
Don't be in a hurry to choose your friends
Doomed to the pangs of an undeceived self-estimate
Dullest of teachers is the one who does not know what to omit
Dulness is not commonly a game fish
Earned your money by the dose you have taken
Easier to dispute it than to disprove it
Easier to say this than to prove it
Educational factory
Elysian abandonment of a huge recumbent chair.
Every person's feelings have a front-door and a side-door
Extra talent does sometimes make people jealous
Facts always yield the place of honor, in conversation
Fall silent and think they are thinking
Few, if any, were ruined by drinking
Flash terms for words which truly characterize their objects.
Fortune is the measure of intelligence
Fortune had left her, sorrow had baptized her
Friendship authorizes you to say disagreeable things
Gambling with dice or stocks
Gambling, on the great scale, is not republican
Generalize the disease and individualize the patient
Generally ruined before they became drunkards
Genius in an essentially common person is detestable
Gift of seeing themselves in the true light
Give it an intellectual shake and hold it up to the light
Give us the luxuries of life
Good for nothing until they have been long kept and used
Good feeling helps society to make liars of most of us
Good Americans, when they die, go to Paris
Got his hand up, as a pointer lifts his forefoot
Governed, not by, but according to laws
Grave without a stone where nothing but a man is buried
Great silent-moving misery puts a new stamp on us
Grow we must, if we outgrow all that we love
Grow old early, if you would be old long
Habit is a labor-saving invention
Habits are the crutches of old age
Half knowledge dreads nothing but whole knowledge
Half-censure divided between the parties
Hard it is for some people to get out of a room
He did not know so much about old age then as he does now
He that has once done you a kindness
He who is carried by horses must deal with rogues
Height of art to conceal art
Her breathing was somewhat hurried and high, or thoracic
Here lies buried the soul of the licentiate Pedro Garcias
Hire logic, in the shape of a lawyer
Hold their outspread hands over your head
Holes in all her pockets
Hoped he did deserve a little abuse occasionally
Hopelessly dull discourse acts inductively
How long will school-keeping take to kill you?
Hung with moss, looking like bearded Druids
Hydrostatic paradox of controversy
I always believed in life rather than in books
I always break down when folks cry in my face
I allow no "facts " at this table
I show my thought, another his
I tell my secrets too easily when I am downhearted.
I love horses
I think I have not been attacked enough for it
I never think I have hit hard unless it rebounds
I replied with my usual forbearance
I am my own son, as it seems to me
I had not thought love was ever meant for me.
I hate books
I have lived by the sea-shore and by the mountains
I have taken all knowledge to be my province
If so and so, we should have been this or that
If they have run as well as they knew how!
If I thought I should ever see the Alps!
Il faut ne pas BRUTALISER la machine
In what direction we are moving
Incipit Allegoria Senectutis.
Infinite ocean of similitudes and analogies
Insanity is often the logic of an accurate mind overtasked
Insanity
Intellectual companions can be found easily
Is this the mighty occan?--is this all?
It is by little things that we know ourselves
It is pleasant to be foolish at the right time
Judge men's minds by comparing with mine
Keep his wit in the background
Key to this side-door
Knowledge and timber only useful when seasoned
La main de fer sous le gant de velours
Laid the egg of the Reformation which Luther hatched
Laughs at times at the grand airs "Science" puts on
Law of the road with regard to handsome faces
Leading a string of my mind's daughters to market
Leap at a single bound into celebrity
Learn anything twice as easily as in my earlier days
Leave your friend to learn unpleasant truths from his enemies
Lecturer is public property
Let us cry!
Liability of all men to be elected to public office
Life would be nothing without paper-credit
Life is maintained by the respiration of oxygen and of sentiment
Like taking the cat in your lap after holding a squirrel
Listen to what others say about subjects you have studied
Little great man
Little muscle which knows its importance
Little narrow streaks of specialized knowledge
Live on the reputation of the reputation they might have made
Living in a narrow world of dry habits
Logic
Logicians carry the surveyor's chain over the track
Long illness is the real vampyrism
Look through the silvered rings of the arcus senilis!
Love must be either rich or rosy
Love is sparingly soluble in the words of men
Love-capacity is a congenital endowment
Lying is unprofitable
Made up your mind to do when you ask them for advice
Man of family
Man who means to be honest for a literary pickpocket
Man is father to the boy that was
Man's and a woman's dusting a library
Man's first life-story shall clean him out, so to speak
Mathematical fact
May doubt everything to-day if I will only do it civilly
Meaningless blushing
Mechanical invention had exhausted itself
Memory is a net
Men that know everything except how to make a living
Men grow sweet a little while before they begin to decay
Men of facts wait their turn in grim silence
Men who have found new occupations when growing old
Men that it weakens one to talk with an hour
Men are fools, cowards, and liars all at once
Might have hired an EARTHQUAKE for less money!
Moralist and occasional sermonizer
Most of our common, working beliefs are probabilities
Moved as if all her articulations were elbow-joints
Much ashamed of some people for retaining their reason
Must not read such a string of verses too literally
Must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it
Must be weaned from his late suppers now
Napoleon's test
Nature dresses and undresses them
Nature, who always has her pockets full of seeds
Nearest approach to flying that man has ever made
Neither make too much of flaws or overstatements
Never forget where they have put their money
No families take so little medicine as those of doctors
No fresh truth ever gets into a book
No man knows his own voice
Nobody is so old he doesn't think he can live a year
None of my business to inquire what other persons think
Nutritious diet of active sympathetic benevolence
Oblivion as residuary legatee
Oblivion's Uncatalogued Library
Odious trick of speech or manners must be got rid of.
Oh, so patient she is, this imperturbable Nature!
Old Age
Old age appear as a series of personal insults and indignities
Old jokes are dynamometers of mental tension
One very sad thing in old friendships
One whose patients are willing to die in his hands
One doesn't like to be cruel,--and yet one hates to lie
One that goes in a nurse may come out an angel
One can generally tell these wholesale thieves easily enough
Open patches where the sun gets in and goes to sleep
Oracle
Original, though you have uttered it a hundred times
Ought to produce insanity in every well-regulated mind
Our brains are seventy-year clocks
Overrate their own flesh and blood
Painted there by reflection from our faces
Passion never laughs
People in the green stage of millionism
People that make puns are like wanton boys
Person is really full of information, and does not abuse it
Personal incidents that call up single sharp pictures
Physical necessity to talk out what is in the mind
Picket-guard at the extreme outpost
Plagiarism
Pluck survives stamina
Poem must be kept and used, like a meersehaum, or a violin
Poetry, instead of making one other heart happy
Poetry of words is quite as beautiful as that of sentences
Poor creature that does not often repeat himself
Poverty is evidence of limited capacity
Power of human beings is a very strictly limited agency
Power of music
Pretensions of presumptuous ignorance
Pride, in the sense of contemning others
Probabilities
Project a principle full in the face of obvious fact!
Provincial conceit, which some of us must plead guilty to.
Pseudo-science
Pseudological inanity
Public itself, which insists on being poisoned
Pun is primƒ facie an insult
Put coppers on the railroad-tracks
Qu'est ce qu'il a fait?  What has he done?
Quackery and idolatry are all but immortal
Question everything
Racing horses are essentially gambling implements
Rapidity with which ideas grow old in our memories
Rather meet three of the scowlers than one of the smilers.
Rather longer than usual dressing that morning
Regained my freedom with a sigh
Religious mental disturbances
Remarkably intelligent audience
Remarks like so many postage-stamps
Returning thanks after a dinner of many courses
Ribbon which has strangled so many false pretensions
Sad thing to be born a sneaking fellow
Saddle-leather is in some respects even preferable
Saint may be a sinner that never got down to "hard pan"
Saturation-point of each mind differs from that of every other
Saying one thing about it and believing another
Scientific certainty has no spring in it
Scientific knowledge
Second story projecting
See if the ripe fruit were better or worse
Self-assertion, such as free suffrage introduces
Self-love is a cup without any bottom
Self-made men?
Self-unconsciousness of genius
Sense of SMELL
Sentenced to capital punishment for the crime of living
"Sentimentality," which is sentiment overdone
"Settler" in the form of a fact or a revolver
Several false premises
Shake the same bough again
She who nips off the end of a brittle courtesy
She always laughs and cries in the right places
Shut out, not all light, but all the light they do not want
Shy of asking questions of those who know enough to destroy
SIN has many tools, but a lie is the handle which fits them all
Single combats between dead authors and living housemaids
Singular inability to weigh the value of testimony
Six persons engaged in every dialogue between two
Slow to accept marvellous stories and many forms of superstition
Small potatoes always get to the bottom.
Smiling at present follies
So long as a woman can talk, there is nothing she cannot bear
So much woman in it,--muliebrity, as well as femineity
So much must be pardoned to humanity
Society is a strong solution of books
Society of Mutual Admiration
Sold his sensibilities
Some people that think everything pitiable is so funny
Some people think that truth and gold are always to be washed for
Somebody had been calling him an old man
Something she is ashamed of, or ought to be
Something better than flowers; it is a seed-capsule
Somewhere,-- somewhere,--love is in store for them
Stages of life
Struggle with the ever-rising mists of delusion
Stupidity often saves a man from going mad
Style is the man
Sudden conviction that I had seen it somewhere
Takes very little to spoil everything for writer, talker, lover
Talk about those subjects you have had long in your mind
Talk, to me, is only spading up the ground for crops of thought
Talk without words is half their conversation
Talkers who have what may be called jerky minds
Talking with a dull friend affords great relief
Talking is like playing on the harp
Talking is one of the fine arts
Talking shapes our thoughts for us
Tears that we weep inwardly with unchanging features
Temptation of money and fame is too great for young people
Tepid and unstimulating expression of enthusiasm
Terrible smile
Thanklessness of critical honesty
That great procession of the UNLOVED
The house is quite as much the body we live in
The schoolmistress had tried life, too
The Amen! of Nature is always a flower
The race that shortens its weapons lengthens its boundaries
The year eighteen hundred and ever-so-few
The way to argue down a vice is not to tell lies about it
Their business is not a matter of sympathy, but of intellect
There is no elasticity in a mathematical fact
There is a higher law in grammar, not to be put down
There is almost always at least one key to this side-door
Think only in single file front this day forward
Think of the griefs that die unspoken!
Third vowel as its center
This is the shortest way,--she said
This is one of those cases in which the style is the man
Those who ask your opinion really want your praise
Time is a fact
To trifle with the vocabulary
To pay up, to own up, and to shut up, if beaten
Too late!---- "It might have been."----Amen!
Travellers change their guineas, but not their characters
Triumph of the ciphering hand-organ
True state of creative genius is allied to reverie, or dreaming
Truth must roll, or nobody can do anything with it
Truth is only safe when diluted
Truth's  sharp corners get terribly rounded
Truths a man carries about with him are his tools
Turn over any old falsehood
Unadorned and in plain calico
Undertakers
Unpacks and unfolds incidental illustrations
Unpretending mediocrity is good
Virtually old when it first makes its appearance
Virtue passed through the hem of their parchment
Virtues of a sporting man
Vulgarism of language
Wait awhile!
Walls of that larger Inquisition which we call Civilization
Want of ideas, want of words, want of manners
We die out of houses, just as we die out of our bodies
We always compare ourselves with our contemporaries.
We are all theological students
We carry happiness into our condition
We don't read what we don't like
We never tell our secrets to people that pump for them.
Wedded, faded away, threw themselves away
Wedding-ring conveys a right to a key to this side-door
Weeded their circle pretty well of these unfortunates
What a satire, by the way, is that machine
What are the great faults of conversation?
Whether anything can be conscious of its own flavor??
Whether gifted with the accident of beauty or not
While she is silent, Nature is working for her
Who is in advance of it or even with it
Wholesale professional dealers in misfortune
Why authors and actors are ashamed of being funny?
Why did I not ask? you will say
Will you take the long path with me?
Winning-post a slab of white or gray stone
Wit knows that his place is at the tail of a procession.
Wonder how my great trees are coming on this summer.
World calls him hard names, probably
World has a million roosts for a man, but only one nest.
Yes, I am a man, like another
Young man knows the rules, but the old man knows the exceptions
Youth and age--something in the soul




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Widger's Quotations
from the Works of Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., by David Widger
