The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Valley, by Richard Stockham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Valley

Author: Richard Stockham

Illustrator: Ed Emsh

Release Date: June 8, 2010 [EBook #32744]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VALLEY ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science Fiction June 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                              THE VALLEY


                         By Richard Stockham


                        Illustrated by Ed Emsh


     _If you can't find it countless millions of miles in space,
      come back to Earth. You might find it just on the other side
      of the fence--where the grass is always greener._

       *       *       *       *       *




The Ship dove into Earth's sea of atmosphere like a great, silver
fish.

Inside the ship, a man and woman stood looking down at the expanse of
land that curved away to a growing horizon. They saw the yellow ground
cracked like a dried skin; and the polished stone of the mountains and
the seas that were shrunken away in the dust. And they saw how the
city circled the sea, as a circle of men surround a water hole in a
desert under a blazing sun.

The ship's radio cried out. "You've made it! Thank God! You've made
it!"

Another voice, shaking, said, "President--Davis is--overwhelmed. He
can't go on. On his behalf and on behalf of all the people--with our
hope that was almost dead, we greet you." A pause. "Please come in!"

The voice was silent. The air screamed against the hull of the ship.

"I can't tell them," said the man.

"Please come in!" said the radio. "Do you hear me?"

The woman looked up at the man. "You've got to Michael!"

"Two thousand years. From one end of the galaxy to the other. Not one
grain of dust we can live on. Just Earth. And it's burned to a
cinder."

A note of hysteria stabbed into the radio voice. "Are you all right?
Stand by! We're sending a rescue ship."

"They've got a right to know what we've found," said the woman. "They
sent us out. They've waited so long--."

He stared into space. "It's hopeless. If we'd found another planet
they could live on, they'd do the same as they've done here."

He touched the tiny golden locket that hung around his neck. "Right
now, I could press this and scratch myself and the whole farce would
be over."

"No. A thousand of us died. You've got to think of them."

"We'll go back out into space," he said. "It's clean out there. I'm
tired. Two thousand years of reincarnation."

She spoke softly. "We've been together for a long time. I've loved
you. I've asked very little. But I need to stay on Earth. Please,
Michael."

He looked at her for a moment. Then he flipped a switch. "Milky Way to
Earth. Never mind the rescue ship. We're all right. We're coming in."

       *       *       *       *       *

The great, white ship settled to Earth that was like a plain after
flood waters have drained away.

The man and woman came out into the blazing sunlight.

A shout, like the crashing of a thousand surfs, rose and broke over
them. The man and woman descended the gang-plank toward the officials
gathered on the platform. They glanced around at the massed field of
white faces beneath them; saw those same faces that had been turned
toward them two thousand years past; remembered the cheers and the
cries that had crashed around them then, as they and the thousand had
stood before the towering spires of the ships, before the takeoff.

And, as then, there were no children among the milling, grasping
throng. Only the same clutching hands and voices and arms, asking for
an answer, a salvation, a happy end.

Now the officials gathered around the man and the woman, and spoke to
them in voices of reverence.

A microphone was thrust into Michael's hand with the whispered
admonition to tell the people of the great new life waiting for them,
open and green and moist, on a virgin planet.

The cries of the people were slipping away and a stillness growing
like an ocean calm and, within it, the sound of the pumps, throbbing,
sucking the water from the seas.

And then Michael's voice, "The thousand who left with us are dead. For
some time we've known the other planets in our solar system were
uninhabitable. Now we've been from one end of the galaxy to the other.
And this is what we've found.... We were given Earth. There's no place
else for us. The rest of the planets in the galaxy were given to
others. There's no place else for them. We've all had a chance to make
the best of Earth. Instead we've made the worst of it. So we're here
to stay--and die." He handed the microphone back.

The silence did not change.

The President grasped Michael's arm. "What're you saying?"

A buzzing rose up from the people like that of a swarm of frightened
bees. The sea of white faces swayed and their voices began to cry. The
din and motion held, long and drawn out, with a wail now and a
fluttering beneath it.

Michael and the woman stood above them in the center of the pale,
hovering faces of the officials.

"Good God," said the President. "You've got to tell them what you said
isn't true!"

"We've been searching two thousand years for a truth," said Michael.
"A thousand of us have died finding it. I've told it. That's the way
it's got to be."

The President swayed, took the microphone in his hands.

"There's been some mistake!" he cried. "Go back to the pumps and the
distilleries! Go back to the water vats and the gardens and the
flocks! Go back! Work and wait! We'll get the full truth to you.
Everything's going to be _all right_!"

Obediently the mass of faces separated, as though they were being spun
away on a whirling disk. Michael and the woman were swallowed up, like
pebbles inside a closing hand, and carried away from the great, white
ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

They ushered the man and woman into the beamed and paneled council
chambers and sat them in thick chairs before the wall of polished wood
desks across which stared the line of faces, silent and waiting. And
on a far wall, facing them all, hung a silver screen, fifty feet
square.

The President stood. "Members of the council." He paused. "As you
heard, they report--complete failure." He turned to Michael. "And now,
the proof."

Michael stood beside the motion picture projector, close to his chair.
The lights dimmed. There was only the sound of the pumps throbbing in
the darkness close and far away, above and beneath and all around.
Suddenly on the screen appeared an endless depth of blackness filled
with a mass of glowing white, which extended into the room around the
watching people, seeming to touch them and then spreading, like an
ocean, farther away and out and out into an endless distance.

Now streaks of yellow fire shot into the picture, like a swarm of
lightning bugs, the thin sharp nosed shadows of space ships, hurtling,
like comets, toward the clustered star smear. And then silent thoughts
flashed from the screen into the minds of the spectators; of time
passing in months, years and centuries, passing and passing until they
themselves seemed to be rushing and rushing into the blackness toward
blinding balls of white light, the size of moons.

The dark shapes of smaller spheres circling the blinding ones moved
forward into the picture; red, blue, green, yellow, purple and many
mixtures of all these, and then one planet filled the screen, seeming
to be inflated, like a balloon, into a shining red ball. There was a
razor edge of horizon then and pink sky and an expanse of crimson.
Flat, yellow creatures lay all around, expanding and contracting. A
roaring rose and fell like the roaring of a million winds. Then fear
flowed out of the picture into the minds of the watchers so that they
gasped and cringed, and a silent voice told them that the atmosphere
of this planet would disintegrate a human being.

Now the red ball seemed to pull away from them into the blackness and
the blinding balls of light, and all around could be seen the streaks
of rocket flame shooting away in all directions.

Suddenly a flash cut the blackness, like the flare of a match, and
died, and the watchers caught from the screen the awareness of the
death of a ship.

They were also aware of the rushing of time through centuries and they
saw the streaking rocket flames and planets rushing at them; saw
creatures in squares and circles, in threads wriggling, in lumps and
blobs, rolling jumping and crawling; saw them in cloud forms whisking
about, changing their shapes, and in flowing wavelets of water. They
saw creatures hopping about on one leg and others crawling at
incredible speeds on a thousand; saw some with all the numbers of legs
and arms in between; and were aware of creatures that were there but
invisible.

And those watching the screen on which time and distance were a
compressed and distilled kaleidoscope, saw planet after planet and
thousands at a time; heard strange noises; rasping and roaring, clinks
and whistles, screams and crying, sighing and moaning. And they were
aware through all this of atmosphere and ground inimical to man, some
that would evaporate at the touch of a human body, or would burst into
flame, or swallow, or turn from liquid to solid or solid to liquid.
They saw and heard chemical analyses, were aware of this ocean of
blackness and clouds of white through which man might move, and must
ever move, because he could live only upon this floating dust speck
that was Earth.

The picture faded in, close to one of the long, needle nosed crafts,
showing inside, a man and a woman. Time was telescoped again while the
man cut a tiny piece of scar tissue from his arm and that of the
woman, put them in bottles and set them into compartments where
solutions dripped rhythmically into the bottles, the temperature was
held at that of the human body, and synthetic sunlight focused upon
them from many pencil like tubes.

The watchers in the council chamber saw the bits of tissue swell into
human embryos in a few seconds, and grow arms and legs and faces and
extend themselves into babies. Saw them taken from the bottles and
cared for, and become replicas of the man and woman controlling the
ship, who, all this time were aging, until life went out of their
bodies. Then the ones who had been the scar tissue disintegrated them
in the coffin-like tubes and let their dust be sucked out into
space--all this through millions of miles and a hundred years,
compressed for the watchers into sixty seconds and a few feet of
space.

Instantly there was black space on the screen again, with the fingers
of flame pointing out behind the dark bodies of the ships.

And then the spectators saw one ship shudder and swerve into a
blazing, bluish white star, like a gnat flying into a white hot poker;
saw another drop away and away, out and out into the blackness past
the swirling white rim of the galaxy, and sink into a dark
nothingness.

Great balls of rock showered like hail onto other ships, smashing them
into grotesque tin cans. The stream of fire at the tail of another
ship suddenly died and the ship floated into an orbit around a great,
yellow planet, ten times the size of Jupiter, then was sucked into it.
Another burst like a bomb, flinging a man and woman out into the
darkness, where they hung suspended, frozen into statues, like bodies
drowned in the depths of an Arctic sea.

At this instant from the watching council, there were screams of
horror and voices crying out, "Shut it off! Shut it off!" There was a
moving about in the darkness. Murmurs and harsh cries of disapproval
grew in volume.

Another ship in the picture was split down the side by a meteor and
the bodies inside were impaled on jagged blades of steel, the
contorted, bloody faces lighted by bursts of flame. And the screams
and cries of the spectators rose higher, "Shut it off.... Oh Lord...."

Lights flashed through the room and the picture died.

       *       *       *       *       *

Michael and Mary, both staring, saw, along the line of desks, the
agonized faces, some staring like white stones, others hidden in
clutching fingers, as though they had been confronted by a Medusa.
There was the sound of heavy breathing that mixed with the throbbing
of the pumps. The President held tightly to the edges of his desk to
quiet his trembling.

"There--there've been changes," he said, "since you've been out in
space. There isn't a person on Earth who's seen a violent death for
hundreds of years."

Michael faced him, frowning. "I don't follow you."

"Dying violently happened so seldom on Earth that, after a long time,
the sight of it began to drive some people mad. And then one day a man
was struck by one of the ground cars and _everyone_ who saw it went
insane. Since then we've eliminated accidents, even the idea. Now, no
one is aware that death by violence is even a possibility."

"I'm sorry," said Michael, "we've been so close to violent death for
so long.... What you've seen is part of the proof you asked for."

"What you showed us was a picture," said the President. "If it had
been real, we'd all be insane by now. If it were shown to the people
there'd be mass hysteria."

"But even if we'd found another habitable planet, getting to it would
involve just what we've shown you. Maybe only a tenth of the people
who left Earth, or a hundredth, would ever reach a destination out in
space."

"We couldn't tolerate such a possibility," said the President
gravely. "We'd have to find a way around it."

The pumps throbbed like giant hearts all through the stillness in the
council chambers. The faces along the line of desks were smoothing
out; the terror in them was fading away.

"And yet the Earth is almost dead," said Michael quietly, "and you
can't bring it back to life."

"The sins of our past, Mr. Nelson," said the President. "The Atomic
wars five thousand years ago. And the greed. It was too late a long
time ago. That, of course, is why the expedition was sent out. And now
you've come back to us with this terrible news." He looked around,
slowly, then back to Michael. "Can you give us any hope at all?"

"None."

"Another expedition? To Andromeda perhaps? With you the leader?"

Michael shook his head. "We're finished with expeditions, Mr.
President."

There were mutterings in the council, and hastily whispered
consultations. Now they were watching the man and woman again.

"We feel," said the President, "it would be dangerous to allow you to
go out among the people. They've been informed that your statement
wasn't entirely true. This was necessary, to avoid a panic. The people
simply must not know the whole truth." He paused. "Now we ask you to
keep in mind that whatever we decide about the two of you will be for
the good of the people."

Michael and Mary were silent.

"You'll wait outside the council chambers," the President went on,
"until we have reached our decision."

As the man and woman were led away, the pumps beat in the stillness,
and at the edge of the shrinking seas the salt thick waters were being
pulled into the distilleries, and from them into the tier upon tier of
artificial gardens that sat like giant bee hives all around the
shoreline; and the mounds of salt glistening in the sunlight behind
the gardens were growing into mountains.

       *       *       *       *       *

In their rooms, Michael and Mary were talking through the hours, and
waiting. All around them were fragile, form-fitting chairs and
translucent walls and a ceiling that, holding the light of the sun
when they had first seen it, was now filled with moonlight.

Standing at a circular window, ten feet in diameter, Michael saw, far
below, the lights of the city extending into the darkness along the
shoreline of the sea.

"We should have delivered our message by radio," he said, "and gone
back into space."

"You could probably still go," she said quietly.

He came and stood beside her. "I couldn't stand being out in space, or
anywhere, without you."

She looked up at him. "We could go out into the wilderness, Michael,
outside the force walls. We could go far away."

He turned from her. "It's all dead. What would be the use?"

"I came from the Earth," she said quietly. "And I've got to go back to
it. Space is so cold and frightening. Steel walls and blackness and
the rockets and the little pinpoints of light. It's a prison."

"But to die out there in the desert, in that dust." Then he paused and
looked away from her. "We're crazy--talking as though we had a
choice."

"Maybe they'll have to _give_ us a choice."

"What're you talking about?"

"They went into hysterics at the sight of those bodies in the picture.
Those young bodies that didn't die of old age."

He waited.

"They can't stand the sight of people dying violently."

Her hand went to her throat and touched the tiny locket.

"These lockets were given to us so we'd have a choice between
suffering or quick painless death.... We still have a choice."

He touched the locket at his own throat and was very still for a long
moment. "So we threaten to kill ourselves, before their eyes. What
would it do to them?"

He was still for a long time. "Sometimes, Mary, I think I don't know
you at all." A pause. "And so now you and I are back where we started.
Which'll it be, space or Earth?"

"Michael." Her voice trembled. "I--I don't know how to say this."

He waited, frowning, watching her intently.

"I'm--going to have a child."

His face went blank.

Then he stepped forward and took her by the shoulders. He saw the
softness there in her face; saw her eyes bright as though the sun were
shining in them; saw a flush in her cheeks, as though she had been
running. And suddenly his throat was full.

"No," he said thickly. "I can't believe it."

"It's true."

He held her for a long time, then he turned his eyes aside.

"Yes, I can see it is."

"I--I can't put into words why I let it happen, Michael."

He shook his head. "I don't know--what to--to say. It's so
incredible."

"Maybe--I got so--tired--just seeing the two of us over and over again
and the culturing of the scar tissue, for twenty centuries. Maybe that
was it. It was just--something I felt I _had_ to do. Some--_real_ life
again. Something new. I felt a need to produce something out of
myself. It all started way out in space, while we were getting close
to the solar system. I began to wonder if we'd ever get out of the
ship alive or if we'd ever see a sunset again or a dawn or the night
or morning like we'd seen on Earth--so--so long ago. And then I _had_
to let it happen. It was a vague and strange thing. There was
something forcing me. But at the same time I wanted it, too. I seemed
to be willing it, seemed to be feeling it was a necessary thing." She
paused, frowning. "I didn't stop to think--it would be like this."

"Such a thing," he said, smiling grimly, "hasn't happened on Earth for
three thousand years. I can remember in school, reading in the history
books, how the whole Earth was overcrowded and how the food and water
had to be rationed and then how the laws were passed forbidding birth
and after that how the people died and there weren't any more babies
born, until at last there was plenty of what the Earth had to give,
for everyone. And then the news was broken to everyone about the
culturing of the scar tissue, and there were a few dissenters but they
were soon conditioned out of their dissension and the population was
stabilized." He paused. "After all this past history, I don't think
the council could endure what you've done."

"No," she said quietly. "I don't think they could."

"And so this will be just for _us_." He took her in his arms. "If I
remember rightly, this is a traditional action." A pause. "Now I'll go
with you out onto the Earth--if we can swing it. When we get outside
the city, or if we do--Well, we'll see."

They were very still together and then he turned and stood by the
window and looked down upon the city and she came and stood beside
him.

       *       *       *       *       *

They both saw it at the same time. And they watched, without speaking,
both knowing what was in the other's mind and heart. They watched the
giant four dimensional screens all through the city. A green, lush
planet showed bright and clear on them and there were ships standing
among the trees and men walking through the grass, that moved gently
like the swells on a calm ocean, while into their minds came the
thoughts projected from the screen:

"This will be your new home. It was found and then lost. But another
expedition will be sent out to find it again. Be of good hope.
Everything will be all right."

Michael turned from the window. "So there's our evidence. Two thousand
years. All the others killed getting it. And with a simple twist, it
becomes a lie."

Mary sat down and buried her face in her hands.

"What a terrible failure there's been here," said Michael. "The
neglect and destruction of a whole planet. It's like a family letting
their home decay all around them, and living in smaller and smaller
rooms of it, until at last the rooms are all gone, and since they
can't find another home, they all die in the ruins of the last room."

"I can't face dying," Mary said quietly, "squeezed in with all these
people, in this tomb they've made around the seas. I want to have the
open sky and the quiet away from those awful pounding pumps when I
die. I want the spread of the Earth all around and the clean air. I
want to be a real part of the Earth again."

Michael barely nodded in agreement. He was standing very still now.

And then there was the sound of the door opening.

They both rose, like mourners at a funeral, and went into the council
chambers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Again they sat in the thick chairs before the wall of desks with the
faces of the council looking across it like defenders.

The pumps were beating, beating all through the room and the quiet.

The President was standing. He faced Michael and Mary, and seemed to
set himself as though to deliver a blow, or to receive one.

"Michael and Mary," he said, his voice struggling against a tightness,
"we've considered a long time concerning what is to be done with you
and the report you brought back to us from the galaxy." He took
another swallow of water. "To protect the sanity of the people, we've
changed your report. We've also decided that the people must be
protected from the possibility of your spreading the truth, as you did
at the landing field. So, for the good of the people, you'll be
isolated. All comforts will be given you. After all, in a sense, you
_are_ heroes and martyrs. Your scar tissue will be cultured as it has
been in the past, and you will stay in solitary confinement until the
time when, perhaps, we can migrate to another planet. We feel that
hope must not be destroyed. And so another expedition is being sent
out. It may be that, in time, on another planet, you'll be able to
take your place in our society."

He paused. "Is there anything you wish to say?"

"Yes, there is."

"Proceed."

Michael stared straight at the President. After a long moment, he
raised his hand to the tiny locket at his throat.

"Perhaps you remember," he said, "the lockets given to every member of
the expedition the night before we left. I still have mine." He raised
it. "So does my wife. They were designed to kill the wearer instantly
and painlessly if he were ever faced with pain or a terror he couldn't
endure."

The President was standing again. A stir ran along the barricade of
desks.

"We can't endure the city," went on Michael, "or its life and the ways
of the people." He glanced along the line of staring faces.

"If what I think you're about to say is true," said the President in a
shaking voice, "it would have been better if you'd never been born."

"Let's face facts, Mr. President. We were _born_ and haven't
died--yet." A pause. "And we can kill ourselves right here before your
eyes. It'd be painless to us. We'd be unconscious. But there would be
horrible convulsions and grimaces. Our bodies would be twisted and
torn. They'd thresh about. The deaths you saw in the picture happened
a long time ago, in outer space. You all went into hysterics at the
sight of them. Our deaths now would be close and terrible to see."

The President staggered as though about to faint. There was a stirring
and muttering and a jumping up along the desks. Voices cried out, in
anger and fear. Arms waved and fists pounded. Hands clasped and
unclasped and clawed at collars, and there was a pell mell rushing
around the President. They yelled at each other and clasped each other
by the shoulders, turned away and back again, and then suddenly became
very still.

Now they began to step down from the raised line of desks, the
President leading them, and came close to the man and woman, gathering
around them in a wide half circle.

Michael and Mary were holding the lockets close to their throats. The
half circle of people, with the President at its center was moving
closer and closer. They were sweaty faces and red ones and dry white
ones and hands were raised to seize them.

Michael put his arm around Mary's waist. He felt the trembling in her
body and the waiting for death.

"Stop!" he said quietly.

They halted, in slight confusion, barely drawing back.

"If you want to see us die--just come a step closer.... And remember
what'll happen to you."

The faces began turning to each other and there was an undertone of
muttering and whispering. "A ghastly thing.... Instant.... Nothing to
do.... Space's broken their minds.... They'll do it.... Eyes're
mad.... What can we do?... What?..." The sweaty faces, the cold white
ones, the flushed hot ones: all began to turn to the President, who
was staring at the two before him like a man watching himself die in a
mirror.

"I command you," he suddenly said, in a choked voice, "to--to give me
those--lockets! It's your--duty!"

"We've only one duty, Mr. President," said Michael sharply. "To
ourselves."

"You're sick. Give yourselves over to us. We'll help you."

"We've made our choice. We want an answer. Quickly! Now!"

The President's body sagged. "What--what is it you want?"

Michael threw the words. "To go beyond the force fields of the city.
To go far out onto the Earth and live as long as we can, and then to
die a natural death."

The half circle of faces turned to each other and muttered and
whispered again. "In the name of God.... Let them go.... Contaminate
us.... Like animals.... Get them out of here.... _Let_ them be
finished.... Best for us all.... And them...."

There was a turning to the President again and hands thrusting him
forward to within one step of Michael and Mary, who were standing
there close together, as though attached.

Haltingly he said, "Go. Please go. Out onto the Earth--to die. You
_will_ die. The Earth is dead out there. You'll never see the city or
your people again."

"We want a ground car," said Michael. "And supplies."

"A ground car," repeated the President. "And--supplies.... Yes."

"You can give us an escort, if you want to, out beyond the first range
of mountains."

"There will be no escort," said the President firmly. "No one has been
allowed to go out upon the Earth or to fly above it for many hundreds
of years. We know it's there. That's enough. We couldn't bear the
sight of it." He took a step back. "And we can't bear the sight of you
any longer. Go now. Quickly!"

Michael and Mary did not let go of the lockets as they watched the
half circle of faces move backward, staring, as though at corpses that
should sink to the floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was night. The city had been lost beyond the dead mounds of Earth
that rolled away behind them, like a thousand ancient tombs. The
ground car sat still on a crumbling road.

Looking up through the car's driving blister, they saw the stars sunk
into the blue black ocean of space; saw the path of the Milky Way
along which they had rushed, while they had been searching frantically
for the place of salvation.

"If any one of the other couples had made it back," said Mary, "do you
think they'd be with us?"

"I think they'd either be with us," he said, "or out in space
again--or in prison."

She stared ahead along the beam of headlight that stabbed out into the
night over the decaying road.

"How sorry are you," she said quietly, "coming with me?"

"All I know is, if I were out in space for long without you, I'd kill
myself."

"Are we going to die out here, Michael?" she said, gesturing toward
the wall of night that stood at the end of the headlight, "with the
land?"

He turned from her, frowning, and drove the ground car forward,
watching the headlights push back the darkness.

They followed the crumbling highway all night until light crept across
the bald and cracked hills. The morning sun looked down upon the
desolation ten feet above the horizon when the car stopped. They sat
for a long time then, looking out upon the Earth's parched and
inflamed skin. In the distance a wall of mountains rose like a great
pile of bleached bones. Close ahead the rolling plains were motionless
waves of dead Earth with a slight breeze stirring up little swirls of
dust.

"I'm getting out," she said.

"I haven't the slightest idea how much farther to go, or why," said
Michael shrugging. "It's all the same. Dirt and hills and mountains
and sun and dust. It's really not much different from being out in
space. We live in the car just like in a space ship. We've enough
concentrated supplies to last for a year. How far do we go? Why?
When?"

They stepped upon the Earth and felt the warmth of the sun and
strolled toward the top of the hill.

"The air smells clean," he said.

"The ground feels good. I think I'll take off my shoes." She did.
"Take off your boots, Michael. Try it."

Wearily he pulled off his boots, stood in his bare feet. "It takes me
back."

"Yes," she said and began walking toward the hilltop.

He followed, his boots slung around his neck. "There was a road
somewhere, with the dust between my toes. Or was it a dream?"

"I guess when the past is old enough," she said, "it becomes a dream."

He watched her footprints in the dust. "God, listen to the quiet."

"I can't seem to remember so much quiet around me. There's always been
the sound of a space ship, or the pumps back in the cities."

He did not answer but continued to watch her footsteps and to feel the
dust squishing up between his toes. Then suddenly:

"Mary!"

She stopped, whirling around.

He was staring down at her feet.

She followed his gaze.

"It's grass!" He bent down. "Three blades."

She knelt beside him. They touched the green blades.

"They're new," he said.

They stared, like religious devotees concentrating upon some sacred
object.

He rose, pulling her up with him. They hurried to the top of the hill
and stood very still, looking down into a valley. There were tiny
patches of green and little trees sprouting, and here and there, a
pale flower. The green was in a cluster, in the center of the valley
and there was a tiny glint of sunlight in its center.

"Oh!"

Her hand found his.

[Illustration]

They ran down the gentle slope, feeling the patches of green touch
their feet, smelling a new freshness in the air. And coming to the
little spring, they stood beside it and watched the crystal water that
trickled along the valley floor and lost itself around a bend. They
saw a furry, little animal scurry away and heard the twitter of a bird
and saw it resting on a slim, bending branch. They heard the buzz of a
bee, saw it light on a pale flower at their feet and work at the
sweetness inside.

Mary knelt down and drank from the spring.

"It's so cool. It must come from deep down."

"It does," he said. There were tears in his eyes and a tightness in
his throat. "From deep down."

"We can _live_ here, Michael!"

Slowly he looked all around until his sight stopped at the bottom of a
hill. "We'll build our house just beyond those rocks. We'll dig and
plant and you'll have the child."

"Yes!" she said. "Oh yes!"

"And the ones back in the city will know the Earth again. Sometime
we'll lead them back here and show them the Earth is coming alive." He
paused. "By following what we had to do for ourselves, we've found a
way to save them."

They remained kneeling in the silence beside the pool for a long time.
They felt the sun on their backs and looked into the clean depth of
the water deeply aware of the new life breathing all around them and
of themselves absorbing it, and at the same time giving back to it the
life that was their own.

There was only this quiet and breathing and warmth until Michael stood
and picked up a rock and walked toward the base of the hill where he
had decided to build the house.

                                                            ... THE END

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Valley, by Richard Stockham

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VALLEY ***

***** This file should be named 32744.txt or 32744.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/4/32744/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
