The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Reluctant Weapon, by Howard L. Myers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Reluctant Weapon

Author: Howard L. Myers

Illustrator: Emsh

Release Date: April 15, 2010 [EBook #31995]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RELUCTANT WEAPON ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction December 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         The Reluctant Weapon


                          by HOWARD L. MYERS


                         Illustrated by EMSH


     _A live weapon is a downright liability ... it's all too apt
      to get qualms of conscience!_

       *       *       *       *       *




_When the Zoz Horde passed destructively through this sector of the
Galaxy, approximately a billion years ago, they suffered a minor loss.
One of their weapons, Sentient Killer No. VT672, had an unexplained
malfunction and was left behind to be repaired by the slave
technicians who followed the Horde. However, the Zoz were met and
annihilated by the Ghesh Empire, after which the masterless slaves
dispersed to their home planets. The weapon, unrepaired, was left
forgotten in the solar system it had failed to destroy._

[Illustration:]

       *       *       *       *       *

Tresqu the Wisest, Ruler of Hova, Lord of the Universe, was being
entertained by a troupe of Goefd dancers when his Lord of War, Wert,
bounded into the Audience Hall. In his hurry to reach Tresqu's throne,
Wert slipped on the nearly frictionless floor and skidded through the
formation of dancers, sending the slender Goefden sprawling in all
directions. He slid to a halt by the Pleading Mat, onto which he
crawled and groveled, awaiting permission to speak.

"I believe three of the dancers received broken legs," Tresqu observed
calmly. "They are rather delicate creatures and not at all clumsy." He
dipped the tip of his tail into an urn of chilled perfume and gently
dabbed it about his nostril. Speaking pleasantly, with long pauses
between sentences, he kept his friendly gaze on the groveling Wert.
"Oft I meditate on the clumsiness of our race in comparison to many
others who are our graceful servants. Why, I wonder, cannot the rulers
be graceful? Some of us are very clumsy indeed--too clumsy to live."

A tremor passed through Wert's stocky body.

"Possibly my Lord of War has news of sufficient import to excuse his
ungainly haste. But I sincerely doubt it. I fear I must soon appoint a
successor to him. Undoubtedly he has news of some sort. Blurt, Wert!"

"Your Majestic Wisdom," whined Wert, "my message is of utmost
importance! The natives of Sol III have captured one of our
decontaminator ships and learned its secrets!"

"Sol III?"

"Yes, Your Wisdom. The planet called Terra."

"Terra? You must realize, lordling, that I cannot occupy myself with
remembering trivialities about individual worlds."

"Yes, Your Wisdom. We have a base, which is commanded by--that is, we
_had_ a base commanded--"

"Enough!" snapped Tresqu. "You start your tale from nowhere and wander
whence and hence!" He raised his voice and called to one of his
retainers. "Fool! Come forward!"

An abnormally slender Hovan arose from a platform off to Tresqu's left
and skipped nimbly forward to stand insolently over the Lord of War,
who was still prone on the Pleading Mat.

"Recite for me," said Tresqu, "the contents of my gazetteer on the
planet Sol III. Listen well, Wert. You may even yet live long enough
to profit by my Fool's style of declamation. Study it well. Also, you
may raise your eyes sufficiently to observe the grace of his
movements. Proceed, sprite."

"Sol III," began the Fool. "An H9 planet. Sol is in the Sirian Colony
Sector, coordinates GL 15-44-17-5, GR 12 [to the power of 7] plus 9, D
14. Terra's life is normal animal-vegetable, with one intelligent
species of hovoids called Humans. Due to the unpleasantly high oxygen
content of the atmosphere, Terra has not been colonized, but has been
placed under the control of the Science Ministry for the purpose of
long-range psychological experiments." The Fool picked up Wert's tail
and twisted it hard but absently as he talked. The Lord of War
twitched painfully. "Many informative reports on the results of these
experiments have been released by the ministry during the past seven
thousand years, dealing mainly with the Humans. The Science Ministry
has declared Terra out of bounds--_Positively no visitors_."

With a single flow of motion, the Fool gave Wert's tail a final twist,
leaped over his body, and bowed deeply to Tresqu.

"Beautifully done, Fool," applauded the Ruler of Hova. "Your mother
claims me as your father, and there are times I am inclined to believe
her. How would you like to be my Lord of War, Fool?"

"Verily, my good master," said the Fool, "I hope you consider me a
Fool by title only."

"Well said, Fool. You are spared. Go seek your pleasures."

With another bow, the Fool backed away.

"Stand up, Wert," said Tresqu, "and tell me about this captured
decontamination ship."

The Lord of War arose and managed to report with some smoothness. "Two
years ago, the Science Ministry turned Terra over to my command,
saying their long series of experiments was concluded. They
recommended complete decontamination of the planet, since the Humans
were developing technologies which could eventually threaten us. I
dispatched a ship for that purpose immediately, but it failed to
return. Also, reports from our base on Terra's satellite Luna ceased
soon thereafter. A scouting expedition was sent. It has just reported
the Luna base destroyed completely, and the decontaminator ship
crashed and stripped of all important devices in one of the Terran
deserts. By studying these removed devices, the Humans have
undoubtedly developed protections against them.

"I humbly submit, Your Majestic Wisdom, that these events have
endangered the safety of your glorious empire, and that drastic steps
against the Humans should be taken immediately. Also, Good Lord of
All, I submit that the Science Ministry, not the War Ministry, is at
fault in this affair. They obviously let their experiments get out of
control before calling us. Undoubtedly they would like to shift the
full blame onto my shoulders."

Tresqu continued his pleasant demeanor. "There may be some truth in
what you say, Wert. You overestimate the danger in this matter, I
perceive. After all, what is one backward planet against the forces of
my empire containing thirty-seven well-armed worlds? The Humans will
be destroyed, even if they have the secrets of a decontaminator ship.
As for the blame, which I admit is deplorable, the Lord of Science
will be called to the Mat to make his excuses. Now, assuming you
remain Lord of War, what action do you plan to take against the
Humans?"

"Your Gracious Wisdom," faltered Wert, "I suggest we use the--the
Weapon. You see, our forces are not fully mobilized at present for
immediate action--"

"Full mobilization isn't necessary or even desirable," Tresqu
interrupted with some impatience. "One task force can do the job. Ah!
I see by your expression that you do not have even one task force in
readiness."

"Your Gracious Wisdom," begged Wert, "you ordered a full holiday this
month to celebrate the twenty-fourth anniversary of your magnificent
reign, and--"

"Enough, Wert! Your tongue is as clumsy as your body." Tresqu nibbled
thoughtfully at the tip of his tail. "We will use the Weapon," he
decided. "In order to allow my court to continue their holiday, I'll
assume direct command in this." He rose from his throne. "Musicians,
summon my guards. I go to visit the Weapon. Come, Wert; come also,
Fool. You will accompany me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly thereafter, Tresqu and his entourage boarded the royal cruiser
and roared away from the City of Wisdom. The ship flew halfway around
the planet and came to rest in a peaceful purple valley where insects
shrilled contentedly and a small stream rippled. Tresqu climbed out
onto the violet turf, his followers coming after him.

"Mighty Weapon of Zoz," he called, "I, Tresqu, seek your presence!"

"Oh, no!" groaned a slightly mechanical voice that seemed to come
from no particular direction. "Will there never be peace, never a
tranquil moment to soothe my spirit and erase the bloody stains of
destruction recorded on my past?"

"That voice! It carries me away!" breathed the Fool. "Such a tragic
tale of tormented strength is implicit in its very tone that I think I
shall swoon!" But he wrapped his tail around the trunk of a nearby
sapling for support and managed to retain consciousness.

"Me, too!" Wert chimed in with suspicious haste. "I'm quite moved!"

"Try not to counterfeit a soul you do not possess." Tresqu glowered at
Wert. "You deceive no one."

The Fool was recovered sufficiently to hit the discomfited Lord of War
with a pebble when Tresqu was not watching.

The Weapon had drifted into sight during this exchange, floating out
of a shady hollow, as if blown by a breeze. It was very simple in
appearance--an impalpable three-foot glowing sphere with a squat
metallic cylinder at its base.

"Tell me not the purpose of your visit, petty lord!" It said. "It is
known to me only too well. Ah, great First Principle! Little did I
reck when, in ages past, I nursed your species to civilization, just
how poorly you would serve my purpose. Peace it was I desired, but do
I get it? No! Your kingdom is powerful, but you have not the strength
to handle your own troubles. You rule twenty-nine planets--"

[Illustration]

"Thirty-seven," corrected Tresqu politely.

"--thirty-seven planets, but when a malignant force appears on your
borders, I, the Weapon, must be called upon to act in my own defense,
and for the sake of a few more restful moments in this calm glade, I
am obliged to destroy, yet it was to avoid destroying that I helped
your species to empire in the old days."

"In truth," spoke the deeply sympathetic Tresqu, "yours is a sad
story. I disturb your richly earned rest only after the sincerest
soul-searching. But affairs of state are at cross purposes in a moment
of crisis, and without your help Hova will be in danger."

"Ah, cruel Fate!" entoned the Weapon, "It aids me in no manner to
protest against your inscrutable machinations! There is no turning
aside, no avoidance of necessity!" In a less declamatory style, the
Weapon addressed Tresqu: "Very well, what is the trouble?"

Tresqu described the events on Terra for the Weapon, concluding, "Now
that the Humans have knowledge of our space drive and armament, they
are certain to attack, especially if they realize they have been
subjects for experiment."

The Weapon flitted about restlessly along the bank of the brook. "I
question the motives of my own thoughts. Do I quibble with myself in
an attempt to escape unwelcome necessities? Tell, petty lord, do your
scientists confirm the picture you paint of the Humans? Are they, like
you, alas, masterfully vicious enough to destroy the peace of dozens
of planets for nothing but revenge?"

"So the scientists say, mighty Weapon," answered Tresqu.

"You, Lord of War, why are you silent when your face is strained with
words crying for expression?" asked the Weapon. "Speak your mind."

Wert squirmed. "If it please Your Mightiness, and you, Your Gracious
Wisdom, I believe the Humans will know that we desire their
destruction, and will try to defeat us for the sake of their own
survival rather than revenge."

"A most convincing point, Lord of War," said the Weapon.

Tresqu flashed a forgiving smile at Wert while the Weapon paused
before continuing:

"However, I fear my unwilling spirit refuses to bow to the most
reasonable of arguments. Please leave me; solve the problem
yourselves!"

Tresqu bowed and moved toward the cruiser. "We obey, Mighty Guide of
our fathers. Let me say in parting that I, too, am grieved by our
talk, much more because of the pain our visit has caused your noble
greatness than because our race is threatened with annihilation. My
deepest hope is that the ravages of war will never reach this peaceful
place which is so dear to your gentle being."

"Wait!" groaned the Weapon. "To slay, or not to slay, that is the
dilemma. Ah, had my old masters of Zoz only left within my powers the
seed of my own destruction, I would gladly seek the consummation of
ultimate peace. But, no, that door is closed to me by deathless locks.
Bring me a Human, that I may learn to hate him. Choose the most
ignoble specimen available. I will converse with him at length so as
to become exasperated with all the despicable traits of his race.
Then, in my contempt for those traits, I will be able to cleanse the
Universe of all Humans."

Tresqu turned quickly to his Fool. "Are there any Humans on Hova?"

"Yes, in the biological research laboratories."

"Then go quickly, Fool, and fetch one. This is a grave matter, and I
trust you to choose the most monstrous specimen available. Hurry!"

The Fool ran into the cruiser and was on his way, leaving Tresqu,
Wert, and several guardsmen with the Weapon. If the Weapon was
conscious of the fact that the Lord of Hova was staying behind out of
courtesy, it did not show it. Instead, it wandered indifferently away,
mumbling a soliloquy of guilt and misery.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sight of the Fool's specimen of humanity repaid Tresqu for the
tediousness of the waiting. It was a particularly sordid-looking
creature with a dirty growth of hairs on its head and face. Its body,
thin as the Fool's, but with no compensating grace of movement, was
clad in a blue garment of roughly woven vegetable fibers, and the
extremities of its nether limbs were enclosed in evil-smelling boxes
of animal hide. Its fierce eyes darted ominously from one Hovan to
another. Its jaw kept working in a slow rhythm, and occasionally a
stream of black liquid exploded through its mouth.

"You have done well, Fool," said Tresqu. "You will be rewarded
highly." Raising his voice he called, "Mighty Weapon, your specimen
awaits!"

"I come!" Once more the Weapon floated into view.

The Earthman's jaw sagged. "'Y God!" he muttered in English, staring
at the approaching Weapon.

"Indeed," said the Weapon, "this appears to be a creature I could
learn to abhor and kill. If only its thoughts equal its
appearance--Speak, Human!"

The man said nothing.

"Mighty Weapon," murmured the Fool, "this Human is truly an ignoble
monster. He has been in captivity for five years and has yet to speak
a word of our beautiful language instead of his own barbaric tongue."

"You fool!" shouted Tresqu. "How is the Weapon going to converse with
him? Why did you bring one that cannot talk?"

Not in the least disconcerted, the Fool replied, "As you ordered, good
master, I brought the worst specimen available. However, the
possibility of linguistic difficulties was not overlooked. I have here
a dictionary of his language, recently compiled by our Alien Affairs
staff." He produced a large volume of manuscript from beneath his
cloak.

"Your Fool shows wisdom, petty lord," spoke the Weapon. "I will study
this book. Know the language, know the people, it is wisely said. In
fact, I originated that saying myself some three thousand years ago, I
believe. Unship any supplies brought for the Human and begone. Three
days will suffice for the arousal of my wrath. Return then."

"As you wish, O Mightiest of All." Tresqu bowed gawkily. "It is my
most ardent desire, Wondrous Guide, that we, your servants, will not
be obliged to disturb your peace again for a thousand centuries, once
this affair is concluded."

"And mine," the Weapon snapped crossly. "Now leave me."

       *       *       *       *       *

The man watched the Hovans enter their cruiser and fly away. Looking
at the Weapon hovering nearby, he squatted on his heels and pulled up
a blade of purple grass to chew. Minutes passed in silence. Then the
Weapon moved away, the book bobbing along behind, supported by some
unseen force.

When it was out of sight, the man muttered, "'Y God, I've saw
fireballs in my time, but that's the first one I ever saw settin' in a
bucket!"

After a thoughtful examination of his surroundings, the man stood up
and walked to the packing cases the Hovans had left. All but one
contained the synthetic food product to which he had grown accustomed
in his five years of captivity. The other box, rather small, contained
a shredded vegetable which served him as a poor substitute for chewing
tobacco. Purple when growing, the leaves of this vegetable were
blue-black when cured, making his frequent expectorations look like
ink.

"Filthy damn stuff!" he grunted, stuffing several handfuls in an empty
overall pocket.

He shuffled down to the brook and tested its temperature with a hand.
Finding it rather cold, he decided against taking a bath. Instead, he
spat into it and watched meditatively as the spot of black was carried
downstream. "I wonder what they turned me loose for," he monologued.

Careful to avoid the spot where the Weapon appeared to have gone, he
returned to the food supply and ate. By then it was getting dark, and
he bedded down for the night on some thick grass under a tree.

"'Y God," he yawned, "I'm glad all these insects don't want nothin' to
do with me."

The Weapon was waiting beside him when he woke up next morning. "Eyes
of your Terran Deity," it said, "I shall now converse with you in your
own tongue. Name yourself, creature!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The man sat up startled. A moment passed before he said, "I'm
Jake--Jacob Absher. What was that you said?"

"My pronunciation is above reproach, Jacob. Therefore I will not
repeat myself. Attend me closely or I shall punish you."

"'Y God, I heard you all right and you didn't make sense!" said Jacob,
determined not to be frightened. "Now if you aim to talk with me, stop
imitatin' a professor and talk so's a man can understand you. I ain't
scared of you, so leave off makin' threats!"

"Such stupid insolence!" gloated the Weapon. "Already I feel my wrath
growing within me! Since it will anger me even more to explain my
words to you, I will do exactly that. My first words to you were,
'Eyes of your Terran Deity,' an expression you use frequently in a
corrupted form to begin your statements. By studying your language, I
learned that 'Zounds' is a similar corruption referring to the wounds
of the Deity, while 'Strewth' refers to your God's truth. Thus, I was
able to understand, and state in uncorrupted form, your remark, 'Eye
God.'"

"'Tain't what it means," objected Jacob, filling his mouth with ersatz
tobacco. "It just means _by_ God."

The Weapon considered this. "And exactly what is the significance of
such a remark?"

Jacob scratched his whiskered chin. "I reckon you got me there. I
guess it means that I mean what I say."

"In other words, any statement you make following that phrase is to be
taken seriously?"

"Somethin' like that."

"Then it follows that your other statements, without the 'by God'
preface, are not seriously intended. Are they jokes or lies?"

"That ain't the way it is at all! I just say 'by God' when I feel like
it, not every time I'm bein' serious."

"Monstrous inconsistency!" groaned the Weapon dramatically. "Ah,
chaotic universe! Is there then no sublime plan, no fateful
development to your endless succession of days? How could even the
most synoptic First Principle find a purpose for creating such an
unplanned, unreasonable species as the Humans? Can it be--unhappy
thought!--that there is no plan to it all, and we exist for naught?"

Jacob listened with open mouth. "Say," he broke in, "are you some kind
of play-actor?"

"That is what I ask myself," the Weapon continued its oratorical
flight. "Are we all actors, speaking the lines written for us by a
Great Playwright who plans to unite all the threads of his plot in a
universal climax to come? Or are we poor random creatures without
purpose?" It paused and added in a more conversational tone, "But that
is not what you mean by your question. No, I am not a play-actor. I am
an unfortunate weapon, reluctant to employ myself for my intended
purpose of destruction of life and unsuited by my structure for the
doing of deeds more worthy in nature."

Jacob squinted about. "A weapon, huh? Let's see you hit that bird
thing sittin' in that tree over there."

"Bloodthirsty fiend! I do not kill for amusement!"

"I just wanted to see how you worked," said the abashed Jacob. "All
I've seen you do is float around and talk a blue streak. As far as I'm
concerned, you ain't nothin' but a big-mouthed bluff."

"Very well, Jacob. If you have formed such an erroneous attitude, it
will be necessary for me to correct you immediately. Observe the red
boulder on yonder hill."

"I see it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The cylindrical base of the Weapon swung to point briefly at the
boulder, which quietly crumbled to dust.

"I be dog!" yelped Jacob. He looked at the Weapon with respect. "You
sure pulverized it! How do you work?"

"You could not understand the processes involved. Suffice it to say I
have the means to collect energy in general and retransmit it in
specific forms and directions. But enough of this. You are here to
answer questions, not ask them. First, tell me what you did in an
average day on Terra."

"That what you call the world I live on?"

"Yes."

"I'm a farmer, you know. I got a place in the Smoky Mountains in
Tennessee. First thing in the mornin', I'd go feed the livestock while
Suzy cooked breakfast." A faraway look came into Jacob's eyes. "Guess
she took the kids and went to live with her mammy when these here
animals grabbed me...."

"Continue," commanded the Weapon.

"Huh? Well, then we'd eat breakfast. Come to think of it, I ain't et
yet this mornin'." Jacob got up and went to get himself some
breakfast.

"But this matter--" protested the Weapon.

"Not on an empty stomach," Jacob said calmly, eating without haste.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he returned, the Weapon questioned him further about his life on
Terra. Hours of ill-tempered conversation passed.

"Such drabness!" the Weapon finally exclaimed. "Creatures who lead
such dull lives as yours should welcome extinction. Not once have you
mentioned an appreciation of the wondrous exaltation that comes from
an esthetic feel for beauty. With the labor of providing for your
grotesque body's animal cravings is your whole life spent. Not in
anger, but as an act of mercy, can I exterminate your defective race!"

Jacob's mouth hung open. "So _that's_ what your monkey's brung me out
here for--fixin' to kill us! 'Y God, you better look out! We got atom
bombs on Earth an' we'll use 'em on you if you try anything!"

"Toys!" sneered the Weapon. "Be assured, Jacob, that I have nothing to
fear from any childish mechanisms your Terrans can contrive!"

Jacob sat stunned. "But you said a minute ago you couldn't kill
nothin'!"

"I can kill only when I'm convinced it is best for my own repose or
for the health of the Universe. Long ago, I could go forth at battle
with thoughtless joy at the command of my masters of Zoz, but now I
must have reasons, must converse at length with my aberrated emotions,
must prepare myself as for an ordeal."

"Them Zozes must've been the Devil's minions," argued Jacob. "The
Commandments says, 'Thou shalt not kill' and when you go against that,
you're goin' against the word of God."

"Poor, futile creature!" sympathized the Weapon. "You actually strive
to pit your naive superstitious mind against my highly developed
mentality in argument. You actually associate my supreme masters of
old with your puny mythological villain! Lowliness should know its
place. But I feel no anger--merely a pitying desire to relieve your
kind of the burden of living."

Silently, Jacob replenished the wad of "tobacco" in his mouth. After
chewing a while, he spat and said dolefully, "I don't reckon there's
nothin' I can say or do that you won't hold against me. I always
heard tell the Devil can twist anything to suit hisself, and I reckon
his minions can do the same thing. An' that's what you are: the
Devil's minion! I reckon you break every Commandment God give us.
Except about committin' adultery. I don't guess you can do that."

"Your piddling reproductive customs have no application on my plane of
existence. Cannot you comprehend that you are less to me than a
microbe? Even my servants, the Hovans, do not concern themselves with
such ignoble concepts as what you call adultery!"

"You mean they live in sin?" asked Jacob.

"They mate as often as they please with anyone they please," the
Weapon replied coldly. "I will ignore the ludicrous implications of
your absurd moral concepts."

"I don't mean to criticize your animal friends," glowered Jacob. "I
reckon they ain't children of God, so it don't matter if they _do_
mate like a pack of dogs. They probably ain't got no souls to keep
pure. It looked to me like they worshiped you like a false god, too."

"They ... O Great Hidden Manifestation!" squalled the Weapon in rage.
"They regard me as their guide and mentor. Nothing more. I would not
allow anything else."

Jacob watched the Weapon in awe. The energy globe was flickering and
flaring wildly in an uncontrolled display of color. "'Y God!" he
exclaimed. "You sure are puttin' on a fireworks show!"

The globe settled down to a tensely nervous fluctuation which hurt
Jacob's eyes to watch. "Never in the ageless span of my existence,"
quavered the Weapon angrily, "have I been insulted in such vulgar
terms by any creature. And now from _you_, creature whom my glorious
masters of Zoz would exterminate like a buzzing fly, like a disease
germ, I hear these senseless mouthings of defamation! Stop it or I
shall destroy you outright!"

The Weapon's fluctuating, along with its loud, grating voice, put
Jacob's nerves on edge. He growled, "I bet your old Zozes live in
adultery just like your animal friends."

The color of the energy globe sank to dull red and the Weapon emitted
a series of buzzing, inarticulate noises.

"It suits not my nature, bit of diseased scum, to slay you in a fit of
indignation," it finally said with tightly controlled fury. "You are
beneath such individual recognition. Yet it is fortunate for you that
your insults have no basis in reality, otherwise my intellect could
not have claimed ascendancy over the immediate urges of my tortured
sense of extreme disgust. Be wise, say I, knowing I request the
impossible, and irk me no more!"

"'Y God, I reckon you don't think you rile me up, too, with all that
high falutin' jabber of yours!" Jacob snapped back.

"As I speak, so speak the mighty Zoz," replied the Weapon in high
dignity. "They are great and noble beings, given to poetic flights and
magnificent deeds. To them, your puny opinions would not even be
recognized as thought."

"If they talk in that puttin'-on, play-actin' way you do, they are a
bunch of phony show-offin' hypocrites!" sulked Jacob.

Several things happened too quickly for Jacob to follow. The color of
the energy globe dropped to absolute black. The metallic cylinder
swung up to point at Jacob. A thin ringing "_Ping!_" sounded in the
cylinder. A killing wave of pure hate struck Jacob.

He had just enough time to know he was a dead man before he blacked
out.

       *       *       *       *       *

It came as a surprise, when Jacob regained consciousness, to find that
he was stretched out on purple grass with the Weapon still hovering
over him.

"You missed, 'y God!" he mumbled, sitting up.

"I regained my sanity in time, Master Technician," the Weapon replied
pleasantly.

"Huh?"

"Ah, day of un-containable joy!" sang the Weapon, flaming pure white.
"Day of glorious release to continue the grandeur of old! As the past
eons of futility passed over me, I sank to the conclusion that I was
forever condemned to my useless existence on this planet, with nothing
to sustain my spirit other than the sense of beauty given me by
masters to fill my leisure hours! But now, Master Technician Jacob,
you have found me and corrected my malfunction, long after I had
surrendered all hope!"

Still dazed by the nearly fatal wave of mental energy the Weapon had
directed at him, Jacob could not understand what had happened. Instead
of talking contemptuously to him, the Weapon was now addressing him as
Master Something-or-other, and....

"What did you say I done?" he asked.

"You corrected my malfunction," repeated the Weapon. "That is to say,
you purged my mechanism of the inhibition against joyful slaughter
that has plagued me for a billion years. Ah, you are a clever
Technician, Jacob! But I comprehend it all now. By arousing within me
an overwhelming emotional desire to kill--a singularly strange
feeling!--you depressed my inhibition to the releasing point. So
telling was your masterful therapy that I almost ceased functioning at
all!

"Your own life was in dire danger for the moment required for my
new-found sanity to assume control. But, of course, all slaves of the
glorious Zoz die willingly when the work of the masters so demands."

"Now wait a minute!" objected Jacob. "I ain't no slave of your Zozes
or no Technician either! You know what I am--a good God-fearin'
human!" His voice dropped to a pleading mumble. "And may God forgive
me if I've got myself in league with the Devil!"

"Ah? Could it be?" murmured the Weapon. "Could indeed your infuriating
insults of the Great Ones have been honest expressions of a puny mind
with no therapeutic intentions? I answer: Yes. The possible occurrence
of specific incidents in the inclusion of space-time is curiously
unlimited. But you have served me, Jacob, and have earned the
privilege of continuing your meager, momentary life. Besides, I can
use you further."

"You can, huh?" Jacob said slyly. "Look here, Weapon, I'll make a
bargain with you."

"Ha! Stupid, untutored slave!" chuckled the Weapon. "Learn that yours
is to obey, not to bargain. But yet, state your price for my
amusement, now that I can no longer be enraged by your words."

"Well, you let the rest of the people on Earth alone and I'll do
whatever you want me to."

After a pause, the Weapon quoted, "'Nobility shows its traces in
surprising places.' You do not sufficiently comprehend my nature,
Technician Slave Jacob. I am a Weapon. My masters point me, as you
would point a rifle, and command that I destroy. I kill at their
direction, but seldom otherwise. Thus, your Terra is safe until
another Weapon or I am aimed and directed. You can make no bargain."

Jacob thought this over. While doing so, the Weapon drifted away.

"Wait here, slave," it said in parting. "I go to meditate on my
recovered sanity."

       *       *       *       *       *

During the next two days, Jacob caught an occasional glimpse of the
Weapon drifting thoughtfully around in the depths of the forest, but
they did not meet for conversation. Jacob amused himself by rigging a
fishing line out of some of the packaging material that contained his
food. He even succeeded in catching a fish, but its queer odor
discouraged him from trying to cook and eat it.

Then the royal cruiser of Tresqu the Wisest dropped into the meadow.
Its airlock swung open and the Ruler of Hova, followed by his
entourage, came out.

"Oh, Mighty Weapon!" bawled Tresqu. "Your loving servant craves
audience!"

"Ah, you have returned, petty lord," said the Weapon, drifting out
from among the trees. "Serve me by calling all the crew members from
your noble ship, that I may view you all together."

Puzzled, Tresqu bowed and said, "Your least whim is law, Mighty
Weapon." He turned and called, "All hands, outside!"

A half-dozen Hovans tumbled through the lock to stand in line behind
the ruler's entourage.

"Is this all of them?" asked the Weapon.

"All, Great Mentor of--"

The Weapon laughed and the Hovans fell dead.

"Come, Slave Jacob," commanded the Weapon. "We take this cruiser."

Dazed and slack-faced, Jacob came out from behind a bush, where he had
hidden himself from the Hovans, and followed the Weapon through the
airlock.

"Even in my insanity, I planned well," said the Weapon. "These ships,
which I taught the Hovans to construct, can be operated simply, even
by such as you. Attend my instructions."

[Illustration]

First, the Weapon taught Jacob to open and close the airlock. Then he
was shown how to fuel the engines, upon which the Weapon made some
changes to improve their performance. Finally, in the control room,
Jacob learned to fly the ship.

This took several hours, at the end of which time Jacob had succeeded
in raising the cruiser into a satellite orbit around Hova.

"Do you comprehend, Slave?" asked the Weapon.

"Sure. This thing ain't nothin' to run compared to a T-model Ford!
Which way is it to Earth?"

"That I shall not tell you, Jacob, because I must leave the ship for a
few hours and desire to find you here when I return. Consider and tell
me: Will you be here?"

Jacob gazed at the broad, star-spangled viewplate that curved around
his seat at the controls. There was, he reflected an awful lot of
nothing out there for a man to get lost in.

"I'll be here," he promised.

"Very good. You must understand that these controls are constructed
for manipulation by such limbs as your own and those of the Hovans.
Thus, it is convenient for me to use you as a pilot instead of doing
the drab, mechanical task with my ill-suited force-field manipulators.
You will be wise to serve me well, Jacob."

Jacob nodded. "You got a point there."

"Operate the lock for me," the Weapon ordered.

Jacob did so and watched the colorful machine drift out of sight in
the atmosphere below the cruiser.

Minutes ticked quietly by as Jacob gazed down at the purple planet and
wondered why the Weapon had not chosen a trained Hovan pilot instead
of him. Also, he wondered how soon the Weapon would take him home to
Earth.

A great swath of the purple planet began turning black. The black
dulled to the gray shade of ashes as the swath grew longer. Over the
surface of Hova, the blackening moved like some colossal paint brush.
Dense clouds of smoke rolled upward to the high reaches of the
atmosphere.

Jacob realized why the Weapon had not selected a Hovan pilot.

When all of Hova was a lifeless ball in a fog of ash, the Weapon
returned.

"Ah, good Jacob!" it boomed jovially. "Let us be up and doing!
Thirty-six planets remain to be visited before my current assignment
is concluded!"

"Do all of them get--that?" asked Jacob, nodding toward the lifeless
world below.

"Yes. I was instructed to render this solar system lifeless before I
malfunctioned. Since then, the life of this system has spread, with my
insane aid, to infest other systems. Of course, my task must now
include all those new Hovan worlds."

"Now wait a minute!" said Jacob in terror. "I can't let you do that!"

"They are your enemies, Jacob," reminded the Weapon. "They meant to
kill every human on Terra. Also, by your own words, they are soulless
animals who live in sinful adultery. Ha! It amuses me to reason with
you, Slave Jacob!"

"Godamighty, forgive me!" prayed Jacob, in horrified defeat.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Weapon seemed to know how to find the Hovan planets from the
markings of the cruiser's star charts. Jacob could not read the charts
and saw no hope of getting back to earth and Suzy and the kids without
the Weapon's help. Dully, he went about the tasks the Weapon ordered
him to do.

Several weeks passed as one world after another was left a smoking
ruin.

Finally the job was done.

"_Now_, can I go home?" begged Jacob.

"To Terra? No, Slave. I still need a pilot."

"But if you take me home," Jacob continued desperately, "you can get a
better pilot than me. I'm just a dirt farmer. There's all kinds of
airplane pilots on Earth, youngsters without families who would give
their right arms to fly this thing, I bet!"

"Ah?" The Weapon considered. "A willing slave is, of course, always
desirable. On the other hand, Terra is up in arms against the empire
of Hova, not realizing it is dead. They would destroy this craft on
sight, and I would be obliged to wait around until they could
construct another for me. No, I have decided we will not go to Terra."

"But, damn it, where else is there to go?"

"In search of my masters of Zoz," replied the Weapon. "Naturally, I
wish to return myself to their services as soon as possible."

"But they might be anywhere!"

"True," the Weapon agreed. "But even after a billion years, I know of
several places in the Universe they may be near. Their great cleansing
sweeps tend to circle and turn in a pattern established long in
advance. Thus we will go to those places where they may now be engaged
in their consecrated task of universal purification."

"But--"

"No more, Slave! We go!"

Out of the Milky Way, the cruiser hurtled at a speed which a sentient
lightwave would find meaningless. On and on they journeyed in quest of
the long-dead Zoz Horde.

They may still be going.

                                                      --HOWARD L. MYERS

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Reluctant Weapon, by Howard L. Myers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RELUCTANT WEAPON ***

***** This file should be named 31995.txt or 31995.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/9/9/31995/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
