The Project Gutenberg EBook of Easy Does It, by E. G. von Wald

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Easy Does It

Author: E. G. von Wald

Release Date: April 12, 2019 [EBook #59255]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EASY DOES IT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             EASY DOES IT

                           BY E. G. VON WALD

               _Hal was stranded in the wilderness with
               a beautiful girl, and it was surprisingly
              enjoyable--while his conditioning was off.
             But, after all, how uncivilized can one get?_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Worlds of If Science Fiction, May 1955.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Hal Webber leaned back in the soft Formair Executive's seat. Although
he twisted and shifted his position restlessly, he received the same
sensation of perfect, comfortable support no matter which way he
sat in it. Which was only natural, of course. Formair was the best
suspend-field furniture manufactured.

As he squirmed about, he had a faint, puzzled frown on his face, and in
his stomach he felt a lurking sensation of unaccustomed tension. Hal
simply could not understand it.

There was a faint humming sound, as the door panel slid back. His
father entered the office.

"Well Hal," the old man murmured softly with a placid smile of
satisfaction. "We've done it."

"Done what? Oh, you mean the new coloration process?"

"Yes. It will quintuple the net value of the family fortune within a
year. We may be the richest people in the world then."

"That's nice," Hal said mildly.

His father flicked a finger across a sensitive spot on the front of the
desk and relaxed as a perfect Formair attendant's chair sprang into
existence to fit his gross, soft body.

"Yes indeed," he said with a mild sigh. "It's been a long, long time
that we've been working for that. Worked mighty hard, too."

"That's right," murmured Hal, a little more forcefully than necessary.
"Splendid."

His father's eyebrows rose at the unusual emphasis, but he was much
too cultured to question the point. He continued along the lines of
the conversation already started. "We'll have to do something for
Bruchner. He has been of tremendous assistance on that project. Did it
practically all by himself. He is a very intelligent man, even if he is
an Outlander."

"Bruchner," said Hal with mild irritation. "All I hear around here
lately is Bruchner. What is he, anyway? Nothing but a savage."

"Eh?" said his father softly, raising his eyebrows again in polite
inquiry.

"If Bruchner is such a brilliant fellow, why doesn't he take the
Treatment and become civilized? I sometimes get a little tired of an
employee who tells me I'm wrong all the time."

"But he is almost always right when he makes such statements, Hal,"
Webber pointed out mildly. "For instance, just the other day I asked
him about the color range to be used with the new process on the
Formair Skydome. He stated flatly that blue was a normal color for sky.
Just like that. I was a little startled, of course, at his lack of
courtesy. But after I thought it over a while, blue did seem to be a
nice color for sky."

"Aaa, blue," Hal muttered. "What's wrong with the green we've always
used in the past?"

Mr. Webber sighed and squirmed a little to get the chair into a more
comfortable fit. Attendant's chairs were not quite as comfortable
as the Executive type, even if they were Formair. Then he cocked an
eyebrow and looked at his son with mild concern. "Hal, my boy, what's
the trouble? I've never seen you so completely upset in all my life."

"I feel funny," murmured Hal. "As a matter of fact, I feel awful. Maybe
there's some connection."

"Ill," the old man nodded agreeably. "Yes, I thought you looked it when
I came in here. Something in the set of your mouth. Tight, sort of."

With an expression of mild surprise, Hal reached up and tentatively
felt around his mouth with a cleanly manicured forefinger.

"Son," Webber murmured, "how long has it been since you had your last
CC Treatment?"

"Eight years," Hal admitted. "It's a little overdue, I suppose, but
surely--" His voice trailed off softly, as his mind seized upon the
possibility.

"That's probably what it is," Webber replied. That was a pretty
definite statement for someone to make about another's sensations, but
anyone could see that the old man was concerned over his son. "Five
years is the standard period at your age. Why haven't you taken it?"

"Well, you know," Hal whispered. "It's that new thing they have in it
now."

"Ah," said his father with comprehension. "That's right, I forgot all
about that. A change. But you won't mind, really you won't. You just
think you will."

"Perhaps so," Hal said, and hastily changed the subject of conversation
to a less depressing topic. "The new coloration process is a real
success, you say?"

"Absolutely. We can now provide flexible hue and chroma for the
complete Formair line--Airchair, Aircab and Airdome. We'll be the only
one who has it, and since every Proprietor on the planet will want
our new equipment as fast as we turn it out, we'll put every other
firm completely out of the business. I've already worked out a method
so that we can convert to export goods, too, without waiting for the
economic balance to be readjusted. Of course, the colonies will have to
curtail a little, but we don't have to concern ourselves with them."

"Yes," agreed Hal.

"Bruchner has been very useful to us on it," the old man repeated
again. "We'll have to show him we appreciate it."

Hal's mouth tightened just perceptibly at the mention of the
redoubtable engineer, but he said nothing. His father continued in his
soft, mild voice. "We must make him a present of something. Should
it be money? Can't give him property, of course, because he isn't a
citizen."

"I don't like the idea of giving an Outlander money. They get their
allotments and that's enough wealth. If you give them money, they will
be able to buy more than their allotment, and that could very easily
upset our own economic balance, you know."

"Quite true," Webber agreed. Then he smiled with placid inspiration. "I
know. We'll give him fame. We'll name the process after him."

"Well," Hal said doubtfully, "I guess that would do it."

"I think so. He's been a great help. As a matter of fact, though, most
of the Outlanders are helpful. A pity they won't take the Treatments
and become citizens. It seems sort of sad the way their emotions cut
them up at times. Like old Tanan last month. Why, up to then he was
almost like a civilized man--even without the treatments."

"I know," Hal said tonelessly. "It was his son, wasn't it?"

"Yes. Curious that the old man should be so concerned over that
little unpleasantness. So his son did get a little excited and kill a
Proprietor and was executed himself. No reason for his father to carry
on so about it, is there? I tried to get him to take the Treatment
then, but--well, after all, you can hardly expect an uncivilized
Outlander to appreciate the advantages, can you?"

"No." Hal did not refer to the fact that the new element recently put
into the standard CC Treatment was causing him to postpone taking it
himself, but his father seemed to sense his thought.

"You won't mind it, son. Really you won't. The Treatment will take care
of the whole thing. It's perfectly obvious that you are suffering from
the effects of the delay right at this moment."

"Oh Chaos," Hal swore softly. "Why did they have to go and put that
element in anyway?"

"Now Hal, you know better than that," his father chided him gently. "It
was either include a marital inclination or else go in for a complete
program of artificial insemination. The women have a vote too, you
know, and they wouldn't hear of it. They don't object to carrying
a child for a few months--that's always been in their conditioning
for some reason or another. But they insisted that if they had to be
mothers, the men would have to be fathers. And they insisted on a
standard, civilized marriage contract to cover the situation."

"I know, I know. I've heard all the arguments. Racial suicide and all.
Nonsense. We can always import Outlanders and force them to take the
Treatment. Outlanders," he pointed out with suitable, mild, cultured
disgust, "breed like animals."

"No son, that wouldn't do the job. We have to keep the blood line.
Outlanders don't have it, you know. If they did, they would have
permitted themselves to be civilized long ago."

Hal's fingers drummed nervously on the desk top, and his father again
raised an eyebrow in mild concern. He shook his head thoughtfully.

Guiltily, Hal stopped his fingers from their satisfying tattoo. He
bunched them into a fist instead, and then gazed at it with mild
unbelief.

"All right," he finally whispered. "This is simply awful. And it looks
as if in order to be cured, I'll have to get me a wife along with it. A
pity, though. Everything was perfectly mild without one."

"You'll be mild with a wife, Hal," his father assured him softly.
"You don't like the prospect now, because it means change. Change, of
course, is always unpleasant. But the Treatment will take care of it
all right. I know that I didn't expect things to work out so mildly
with a wife. It was optional back in those days, and if it hadn't
been for your mother's family money, I never would have married.
Particularly her--with her family history of fecundity. As witnessed
by the children we produced--you and your sister. But Formair needed
the money, and I was the only available man in the Webber clan. When
I agreed to make the sacrifice, they made me president of the firm,
because it isn't often that a man will do so much for his own family.
Shows real character. It's in the cultured family blood, naturally."

Hal had heard all this many, many times before, but he listened without
irritation. Or at least, with only the mild irritation that was the
result of his present unstable condition.

"Yes indeed," his father went on in his mild, comfortable voice.
"Hardly knew she was around the house, though, once the Treatment was
over with. It was just as if she had been around all my life. Marvelous
process."

"All right," Hal murmured. "I'll take it."

"Be a good idea to pick out a wife first. Sometimes there are a
few minor adjustments to make because of outstanding individual
characteristics. You get an absolutely perfect fit that way, you know."
He stood up and walked toward the door, the flabby muscles of his body
easily supporting the two pounds relative of his weight.

"The Ansermet family has a female available, I believe," he murmured
as he walked. "Excellent choice. But you better have the probability
checked anyway."

"I know about her," Hal replied thoughtfully. "But what's she like?
Have you ever met her?"

His father smiled benignly back at him, as he practically floated
through the doorway. "That doesn't matter a bit," he said mildly. "It
doesn't make any difference at all what either of you are like. The
Treatment will bring you both back to absolute, statistical normal,
and you'll both be a perfect fit for each other. Quite pleasantly
civilized."

The door hummed shut behind him.

"Well," Hal announced aloud to himself, "guess that's it."

He ordered the automatic secretary to make all suitable arrangements
and then stood up. He walked to the elevator, where a soft, hissing
breeze conveyed his temporary one-tenth pound relative gently up the
tube to the roof. There his weight returned to its normal two pounds
relative, and he spoke to the robot attendant. "My cab." His Formair
Aircab was promptly and quietly delivered, and Hal stepped inside.

"Destination?" a voice inquired softly from the control bank.

"Take me to the nearest available Civilization Conditioning Treatment
Center."

At once, the cab took off. It was a silent and comfortable motion. Hal
had always liked flying.

The automatic pilot was speaking to him gently. "Central Authority
advises that the nearest available CCT Center at this time is in
the metropolis of Knoxville. This requires traversing interurban
wilderness."

Hal frowned just slightly. He had never seen the interurban wilderness,
of course, and had not the slightest desire to do so. That was chaos.
He inquired, "How soon can the local Center take me?"

"Three days, seven hours twenty minutes from reference time. Mark
time ... mark!" the robot announced the temporal point of reference.

"Too long," Hal replied wearily. "Let's go to Knoxville. And shut off
all outside views. I do not wish to see the chaos."

The Aircab obediently turned and transposed through the suspend-field
of the York metropolis Airdome. It was an effortless passing, since the
field that constituted the wall structure of the Aircab was exactly in
phase with that of the Airdome field. Both were Formair manufacture, of
course.

The pleasant, silent, effortless motion of the Aircab soon produced its
usual somnolent effect on him, and he dozed comfortably off. He slept
the entire trip.

At Knoxville, he spoke to the Center Technician briefly, advising the
master robot of the possibility of his altered economic status, and the
matter was thoroughly checked by the computer at Central Authority.
Every conceivable source of psychosomatic tension and internal conflict
was studied, and suitable alterations on Hal's master curve plotted.
The process took ten minutes, while Hal dozed under the soothing warmth
of the examination cap. There was a crackling buzz, and it was over.

He awoke immediately, and felt wonderful. No tension. No irritation.
Not the slightest bit of his recent restlessness. Hal was delighted.
On the way out of the cubicle, he encountered another Proprietor, and
smiled at him with perfect, civilized mildness.

"York," he ordered his Aircab. Once again, the sleek button-shaped
vehicle soared up through the Airdome and out over the interurban
wilderness. Hal contentedly went to sleep right in the middle of the
pilot's automatic rundown of flight data.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was jolted awake by a raucous rattle from the control bank. Blinking
his eyes sleepily, he said, "Please stop all that noise. What is the
trouble?"

A very unpleasant and notably ungentle voice replied, "Apologies sir.
We are out of control. Aircrash has occurred."

Aircrash! An almost unheard-of thing that sometimes happened to people
who used inferior equipment like that produced by firms other than
Formair. People were even known to be killed by it.

"Report," he said quietly, then flinched a little at the raucous
scratching of the speech mechanism.

"Reference point ... mark! Altitude eleven thousand three hundred
seventy one feet. Velocity reduced to two hundred nine point nine
miles per hour. Locus: seven hundred point eight miles from nearest
civilized metropolis, which is York." The voice continued, but became
unintelligible as the mangled circuits faltered.

Seven hundred miles from civilization! Wilderness. Chaos; that settled
it, of course. Hal smiled gently as he realized that he was about to
die. A civilized man obviously could not be expected to survive in
chaos. He observed that he was breathing more strenuously, and realized
that it was the result of the rapid failure of the antigravity field.
Never in his life had Hal been under the full force of the earth's mass
field, but he knew the symptoms. Once he had been exposed to a one-half
gee for a few hours. Very unpleasant, he recalled.

The automatic pilot's unintelligible speech suddenly stopped
altogether. There was a heavy, awkward lurch that threw Hal forward
against the front panel. But before he struck it, the field generator
failed completely, the panel ceased to exist, and Hal was flying
through the air. He shut his eyes, and placidly waited for death.

A moment later, he hit the ground sharply, rolled over and over, and
lay still.

He sighed heavily. Death? He had always fancied that death would be a
complete absence of sensation, and no consciousness of effort whatever.
Instead, his breath was coming in deep, heavy sighs, his head hurt, his
arm was aching, and something was tickling his nose.

"Come on, wake up," a voice said briskly.

Hal opened his eyes and looked up at a golden-framed face. It was the
face that had been speaking, and the pleasingly shaped lips now moved
again. "You aren't hurt, you know. Just a little shaken up."

Hal continued to stare at the woman for a moment, then muttered
"Umph," and struggled to a sitting posture. It was a great effort in
the unaccustomed full earth gravitational field. The woman was an
Outlander, no doubt about it. That was evident from her highly spirited
tone of voice. But as Hal looked around at the strange picture of
undisturbed interurban wilderness, he found that most astonishingly
he did not mind it. As a matter of fact, he rather liked her tone of
voice. It was all very puzzling.

"What happened?" he muttered heavily, his eyes moving back to the
landscape and the small metal boxes which housed the now defunct
suspend-field generators.

"There must have been something wrong with your Aircab," she replied.
"You crashed. The same way I did a couple days ago." The woman walked
over to the generator boxes, picked them up and brought them back to
where he was still sitting on the grass. "We'll need these," she
explained. "There are emergency supplies inside them."

Hal didn't move. She waited a moment, then said lightly, tossing her
golden hair, "Come along now. We're way out in the wilderness, you
know, and there aren't any robots to bring us our dinner."

"Wilderness," Hal murmured. "That's right. Well, I guess we'll die
here."

"Oh nonsense!" She stamped her foot with impatience. "This would have
to happen to me. Of all people to be stranded with in the wilderness, I
have to get one of you insipid, gutless Proprietors."

"Oh yes?" Hal said with unconscious anger, lurching to his feet. "Who's
insipid and gutless? I'm considerably more civilized than you are."
Quick surprise crossed her face as she listened. Hal continued his
angry speech. "Why is it that all you savages always think you know how
to live better than your superiors? If you are so clever, why aren't
you civilized?"

"Well, listen to him. You sound almost human."

She was laughing at him!

"Damn savage," he growled. He turned and strode purposefully away from
her across the soft matting of grass.

"Where do you think you are going?" she called.

"Away from here," he replied. But the rapid pace in the unaccustomed
gravity was very quickly taking his energy. His breath came in deep,
labored gasps already, and he could scarcely move his feet.

He stopped abruptly, and looked at the distant horizon. There was
nothing in sight that indicated civilization. These regions had
not been inhabited for two hundred and fifty years--ever since
the severance of the planetary colonies from political control by
the motherland, and the settling of the Proprietors into their
well-separated, civilized cities. The land was all owned by the
Proprietors, but was unnecessary, and hence not used.

He felt a light touch on his arm.

"I'm sorry," she apologized softly. "I can understand you a little, but
you're so completely under the influence of your horrible personality
conditioning methods that you can't possibly understand me."

"Who's under what influence?" Hal said in a valiant attempt to express
his irritation, but his voice held the obvious weakness of fatigue.

"You poor boy," she sympathized. "You don't sound very much influenced
by it right now."

At her words, Hal suddenly became aware of the unaccustomed vigor
of his own emotions, and he was puzzled by it. But it seemed oddly
unimportant for some reason. "How come you can handle this awful weight
so easily?" he asked her.

Her laughter was light and delightful. "We spend most of our lives
under natural conditions, not under an antigravity machine. I've only
been on Earth for a few months, visiting my father. But a lot of that
time was spent out here in this beautiful wilderness."

"Horrible chaos," he muttered. He glanced up and observed a mild, blue,
cloud-studded sky. "Why it is blue, after all. Isn't it?"

"What's blue?"

"The skydome."

She glanced up thoughtfully. "Of course it's blue. And this is not one
of your artificial skys. This is the real thing. There's no artificial
weather control out here, you know. You get natural sunlight, natural
winds, storms, rain--oh, lots of things."

"Gahh," said Hal.

"What makes you surprised at finding that the sky is blue?"

"Probably because I never saw it before. The only time I ever heard
of its being anything other than green was when an engineer we have
working for us at the factory said it was blue."

"Well, never mind the sky. Let's find some place where we can get a
little shelter for the night." She began to lead him slowly along an
animal trail to a cluster of trees on a nearby stream. She walked with
the obviously delayed pace one takes with invalids, but Hal had a
difficult time keeping up.

Finally, she said, "Here's a pretty good place. Sit down next to that
tree. You must be worn out."

"Oooo," he groaned, reclining back against a broad, rough oak trunk,
then stiffening painfully away from it again. "It doesn't fit," he
mourned plaintively.

"Now you're sounding silly again," she scolded. "Go on, lean back.
There aren't any suspend-field lounges out here for you, so you take
what you get."

Obediently, he relaxed against the rough, twisting bark. He was very,
very tired. On second thought, even this rugged seat was comfortable.
He sighed heavily, and then looked pensively around again. "Oh well,
what does it matter? We'll be dead soon."

"Don't talk like that!" she snapped with annoyance.

"Why?" he inquired listlessly. "Everybody knows a civilized human being
can't possibly survive in the wilderness. That's why no one ever comes
here. And I'd just as soon die right now, if you have anything suitable
for killing."

The woman stared at him with a tight frown between her eyebrows. Then
she shook her head with wonder. "How you people can call yourselves
civilized is beyond me. You yourself don't seem so bad, except that you
don't have any guts. They've trained it all out by now."

"Please," begged Hal. "You sound like that uncouth engineer that works
for us. Impertinent."

"That what engineer?" she demanded spiritedly. "Who are you, anyway?"

"I'm Webber. Hal Webber. The engineer is a savage--oh sorry." He smiled
weakly. "You're a savage, too. Guess you Outlanders don't regard
yourselves as such."

"No we don't," she snapped. "And if it weren't for us, you silly fools
here on Earth would have died out long ago."

"Outlanders are noted for their misplaced pride, of course," Hal
commented with a mildness that was impelled by fatigue rather than
civilized conditioning.

"Oh are we now?" she said angrily, standing up and bending over him.
"And who do you think you are, Lord Proprietor? Some humble god,
perhaps? Let me tell you something, Hal Webber, I've heard about you.
You know who I am? My name is Lois Bruchner. That uncouth engineer you
just referred to happens to be my father."

Hal was puzzled. "What on earth is the matter?" he asked. "Why are you
so excited?"

"You called my father uncouth."

"Why get excited about that? After all--" Hal gestured weakly, trying
to reason with her, "--it's only your father. I didn't say you were
uncouth. Funny thing is--I like you."

"Suppose I called your father names?" she demanded, her lower lip
protruding belligerently.

"You can call him anything you like as far as I am concerned."

Lois Bruchner stood there a moment, her mouth open in astonishment.
Then she sat down beside him again quietly.

"That's right," she murmured, "they even educate love out of you."

Hal sighed heavily, and slid away from the tree onto the rough, rocky
ground. It was painful, but he was so tired. His breath came in
regular, deep sighs as he went to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the time he woke, Lois had constructed a kind of primitive lean-to
shelter over him. Hal was amazed. The sheltering purpose of the
structure was evident to him, and he was startled that she should have
been able to design such a thing on the spur of the moment.

She heard him stir and looked up from the fire she had built in front
of the lean-to. "Hungry?" she asked.

He was ravenous, but his muscles ached in every fibre. His wonder at
her cleverness disappeared abruptly when he tried to move. He rolled
over groaning and helpless.

Immediately, she was at his side, pushing him back onto the bed of dry,
fragrant grass she had put him on. "Now don't try to move around," she
admonished. "Just a few days, and you'll be all right."

"Oooo," Hal groaned. "This is awful."

"There, there," she murmured solicitously. "I've made you some soup.
You'll like it."

"Soup," he groaned. "I want food. Good solid synthomeat. Don't you have
any food?"

"Solid food in your stomach so soon in this heavy gravity would kill
you."

She went away and returned quickly with a little cup and spoon, and
proceeded to empty the container into his lax mouth a few drops at a
time. After a while, he ceased his protesting. It was less painful
to swallow the slop than to fight it. Very soon afterward, he lost
consciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, he was again aware of his surroundings. He felt tremendously
better, and observed with a peculiar satisfaction that it was morning.
Funny sounds were in the air, which he eventually recognized as the
cries of wild birds and insects. Insects? He blinked his eyes and
struggled to a sitting position, and looked worriedly around. Insects
can carry disease, he remembered. And wild animals were reported to be
carnivorous.

His clumsy motions awakened Lois, who had been sleeping beside him. Hal
looked down at her with a vague wonder. Such a nice looking savage,
he thought, as she popped open her eyes. She smiled a pleased morning
smile at him and lazily stretched.

"Hi," she said. "How do you feel?"

"Quite mild," Hal admitted with wonder. "Odd, too. That junk you fed me
last night must have some very efficient drug in it."

"Junk I fed you last night?" Lois echoed, sitting up. Then she laughed
her amusement. "Oh, you mean that soup. That wasn't last night, Hal
Webber. That was last week."

"But--I just woke up," he protested.

"Yes." She smiled at him, reaching up and patting his cheek
affectionately. "You've been a little delirious. Gravity trauma, very
common. You get used to it fast, but that's one thing they didn't
condition you to, I guess, and your conscious promptly rejected the
possibility."

Sudden remembrance came to Hal of the agony it had been to move
the last time he remembered trying it. Cautiously he lifted an arm
and flexed it. He glanced back at Lois, who was watching him with
amusement. "It feels all right now. Heavy and clumsy, but no pain."

"Good." She stood up and brushed her unruly hair away from her
forehead. "I'll fix your breakfast just as soon as I take my bath, all
right?" she said. Hal nodded absently. The stream was twenty yards
away, and Lois walked quickly over to it. There she pulled her jumper
over her head and dove into the crystal water. "Eeii, it's cold!" she
shrieked. Her vigorous splashing threw sharp brilliance in the early
morning sunlight. After a few minutes, she came out, letting the water
dry on her soft, golden skin.

Hal was watching her in open-mouthed admiration. It was a most
remarkable sensation, this pleasure at seeing her move in that lithe,
supple way. He had never before experienced such a thing.

As she came up on the grassy bank, she noticed his rapt gaze, and
quickly snatched up her single garment and held it in front of her.
"All right," she told him briskly. "You too. You're much too big for me
to handle effectively, so you haven't had a decent bath since we got
here. And it gets pretty hot during the day."

Obediently, as if in a vic-spell, Hal stood up and walked to the
water's edge, keeping his eyes on her.

"Look where you're going," she said sharply, and he shook his head
dazedly. He slowly removed his clothing, dropped it on the ground, and
jumped into the water.

That was the end of the spell. The water was like ice, he howled like
a wounded animal and tried to jump out again. But the gravity made him
clumsy and he fell back with a great splash. He rose again, gasping and
sputtering, making wild, awkward movements--in a frenzy to get out of
the excruciating coldness. Finally he was lying on the grass, panting
and exhausted.

Lois was standing over him, her pale blue eyes dancing with delight.
"What a spectacle," she bubbled merrily. "You should have seen
yourself. I sure wish I had a vic-o-graph with me. Such performances
should be preserved."

Unaccountably, Hal found himself gurgling like a delighted baby, and
then laughing with her in loud, uncivilized guffaws.

After a few minutes, they were both worn out with hilarity. Lois
sighed. She gave him a brimming smile, and went on back to the lean-to.
"Get your clothes on," she said. "I'll have some breakfast for you in a
few minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was food, Hal agreed, but it was not very good. It had come out of
the standard emergency ration from the Aircab master units, and no
power on earth could have made it very palatable. And the supply was
nearly gone.

"I don't know how we can get back," she said thoughtfully, as she
chewed on a wafer. "Plenty of Aircabs go by--I've seen a dozen or
so during the past week. But nobody ever looks out of them except
Outlanders, and there aren't many of us around. So there isn't any
point in building a signal fire."

Hal did not reply. He lay back on the grass, his belly full with
unaccustomed satisfaction, staring at the blue sky. He decided that he
still preferred green. "It's sort of a washed-out color," he murmured.

"What?"

"The sky. It's sort of pallid and weak-looking."

"That's haze. But spoken like a big, strong man," she said lightly. And
then wistfully added, "A pity they always take it out of you."

Hal frowned, and looked down from the sky to the windblown dampness of
her golden hair. "What do you mean by that?" he inquired.

"Nothing." Her gaze returned modestly to her wafer, and she continued
the former subject. "We were talking about getting back to what you
call civilization, remember? Or do you prefer we become the new Adam
and Eve lost in the wilderness?" she asked, her eyes dancing. "We could
start a new primitive dynasty of plains savages."

"Oh." Hal's mind came back to the immediate problem. "Oh, yes, that's
right. We have to get back." He frowned a moment. "Well now, let's see.
There're a number of emergency stations spotted around the interurban
wilderness. Can't just remember where I learned about them--must have
been Treatment information." He thoughtfully picked up a stick and
began drawing diagrams of maps in the loose soil. "There." He pointed
with the stick. "One of them should be about two hundred miles north
of where we are now, provided the automatic pilot of my Aircab was
accurate in its final position fix."

Lois was looking at the crude map when he glanced back up at her. There
seemed to be a sadness in her expression. She nodded her head at the
map. "From that it looks like those emasculating treatments do some
good after all."

"Don't talk like that," he reproved her. "The Civilization Conditioning
Treatment is the basis of our culture."

She started to speak, hesitated, and then blurted out, "What,
precisely, does it do for you?"

"Don't you know?" Hal asked astonished, and then answered his own
question. "Oh, of course, Outlanders would hardly know much about
civilized history. Well, before interplanetary exploration was started,
there weren't any areas at all like this wilderness. The planet was
much too crowded. The people lived in huge, contiguous cities and were
incessantly battling with each other for economic survival, social
survival and animal survival. The vast majority of the population
couldn't stand it. They developed all kinds of psychogenic illnesses.
The impact of the uncontrolled inclinations of individuals meeting the
absolute self-control required by civilization was killing them.

"Then, gradually, the Civilization Conditioning process was developed.
What happened then was just what you would expect--the people who
took the Treatments were so much better adapted to civilized living
conditions that the others simply didn't have a chance. Just as soon
as planetary colonies were opened up, the savages were all shipped
off. There were a lot of riots and small-scale wars for a while, but
eventually the superior conditioning of the civilized people won out.

"After things had stabilized again, anyone who wanted to was permitted
to become an Earth citizen, but he had to take the Treatment, and keep
it up. But by that time, most savages had a lot of peculiar prejudices
against it, so the population of Earth has remained very small. The
robotic defenses of the Proprietors protected the planet from further
invasion, and now the robotic police maintain order everywhere in the
system.

"Of course, the planets are extremely poor in natural resources, so
we supply the basic material, even though we relinquished political
control long ago. The colonies pay us by sending unusually gifted
technicians like your father to work for us. Naturally, Outlanders
have no rights, whatsoever, here. Not even the right to life or
freedom or payment of the material allotment. But unless they commit
a crime or otherwise interfere with the Proprietors, there is not the
slightest danger of being molested by any citizen, because citizens are
civilized."

Hal stopped his history lecture and looked back up at her. "The
Treatment is responsible for the entire rational order of our culture,
as you probably know."

"But look how insipid it makes you all," she burst out. "You're so weak
and wishy-washy. There isn't a noble or even a strong sentiment in your
entire society."

"That is how the process works. It is nothing but a series of checks
and balances artificially installed in the subconscious which make
strong sentiments unnecessary, and which prevent unstable activity.
The result is a perfectly smooth existence with no ups or downs, and a
perfect cooperation between civilized people."

Lois thought this over for a moment. Then she asked curiously, "How
do you account for the fact that you--after all the Treatments you
have taken--are so different from other Proprietors? You, well--"
she stumbled, blushing a little--"you seem perfectly normal in your
reactions."

Hal shook his head. "I don't know. Maybe my last Treatment had an error
in it." But he shook his head again at that idea, because the computer
at Central Authority never made mistakes. "It _is_ strange."

"I think it's wonderful." She smiled at him with quick radiance.

Hal grinned happily back at her, feeling an alien surge of joy as he
looked at the smile and at her. "Well, whatever it is, for the next few
months or so it looks like we'll be savages in fact."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were. And they took a long time walking north to their
destination. It was a remarkably satisfying experience for Hal. And it
was for Lois, too, as she pointed out to him the night after they found
the emergency station. There was a small Formair shelter at the place,
and a simple automatic distress transmitter which was set in operation
by one push of a button. Symbols marked on the case of the transmitter
assured them that assistance would be forthcoming within twelve hours.

It was their first night in a civilized shelter, and their last night
together in the wilderness. Early the next morning, an Authority Aircab
came humming swiftly down to the meadow where they were waiting.

Once inside the Aircab, Hal became taciturn and thoughtful, but Lois
was not disturbed. She talked enough for both of them. Hal luxuriated
in the pleasant reawakened rapport with the things of civilization.

Back at the city, they went to Bruchner's residence, and Lois' father
rushed outside to greet them. Lois ran happily to him, embracing
him, and volubly explaining how wonderful Hal was, how he had saved
her from being gobbled up by a lot of wild animals, and how strong
he was, and sundry other affectionately innocuous exaggerations. Hal
looked curiously on for a few minutes in idle wonder at the strange
attachments of Outlanders. Then Lois proudly pulled him over next to
her.

"Isn't he wonderful? And we're in love--oh, so much in love."

"Lois," Bruchner mumbled unhappily. "There are some things you have to
be told. I should have told you before--"

"You don't have to tell me anything," she bubbled happily. "You can
say all you want to about the Proprietors, but this one is different.
He's--he's real!"

Hal laughed diffidently, and moved a little further away from her. He
gazed around at the city, recognizing it with thirsty familiarity,
happily part of it again. The experience of the past three months
already seemed far away.

"Hal," Lois murmured, suddenly aware of his rapidly growing coolness.
"Hal, darling, what's wrong?"

"Why nothing at all, uh, Lois." He looked at her uncomfortably for a
moment, and backed a step further. "It's just--well, you know."

"Oh no you don't," she cried, rushing up to him and grabbing his arm.
"Where are you going--Dad!"

"Please, Miss Bruchner," Hal murmured mildly, disengaging his arm from
her. He gazed hungrily around him again the moment she let go, and
looked back at her only when he was startled by a sudden, choking sob.
Lois was staring at him, her fist to her mouth, the pale blue eyes
brimming.

"Oh no!" she cried tremulously.

"Lois," Bruchner said, his voice sounding harsh with repressed
emotions, "come in here. You've got to know what the situation is." He
put his arm around her trembling shoulders and led her off, glaring at
Hal in helpless fury.

The moment they were out of sight, Hal turned and stepped back into
the Aircab. He ordered it to take him home. His parents were there,
watching a vic-entertainment, which Hal promptly turned off.

"Who did that?" his father mumbled, coming immediately out of the
trance. "Hal? That wasn't a very nice thing to do, son."

"Why Hal," his mother sighed mildly. "You're not dead after all.
How nice. Don't pay any attention to your father--it wasn't a very
interesting vic anyway."

"Shouldn't turn it off like that, though."

"Um, sorry," Hal apologized gently. He relaxed into the comfortable,
perfect fit of a Formair lounge. "Just thought I'd let you know I'm
still alive."

"Well, we're glad," his mother murmured absently. "Must have been
pretty awful."

"That's the funny thing about it, though--I didn't mind it a bit at
the time. Very curious. I had an Outlander woman with me--Bruchner's
daughter, as a matter of fact."

"Oh dear," Mrs. Webber sighed. "Poor Hal."

"Well, like I say, it wasn't exactly mild, but it was quite tolerable,
somehow." He frowned just slightly, and shook his head at the
puzzling incongruity. He recalled his three months of association
with the uncivilized woman, somewhat wistfully contemplating strong,
overpowering sentiments in a chaotic wilderness. "Anyway," he said at
last, "I'm home again, and it's all over. I won't have to have anything
to do with her now."

"Yes," Mrs. Webber murmured. "Odd that you should have survived though,
isn't it? I thought a civilized man in the wilderness would die almost
at once."

Webber gave the cultured equivalent of a mild snort. "Of course he
could survive. Oh--" and he laughed softly in apology "--that's right.
I forgot to tell you about that."

The eyes of his wife politely turned to him and he explained. "A couple
of weeks after our son here apparently had been killed, I happened
to run into an Authority physician. I mentioned it to him, just in
passing. He told me that there was a factor in the CC Treatment that
provided for such things.

"It seems that the Civilization Conditioning they give you is only
designed to enable a man to survive in a city. In order for the
conditioning to function, you have to have that civilized urban
environment. Once the environment is removed, the conditioned complex
has nothing to react against, and the man immediately becomes
almost--but not quite--as savage as a typical Outlander.

"That way, a civilized man can always manage to live in the wilderness,
given half a chance. Once he gets back into a city again, the proper,
civilized environment is returned, the conditioning starts functioning
immediately and presto!--the man is civilized again."

"Well now, that's nice," Mrs. Webber said placidly. "Wouldn't like to
see my boy dead."

"Yes," her husband mused. "The physician told me that right after we
decided Hal was dead. I was going to mention it to you, but it slipped
my mind somehow."

"Well, you're just a tiny bit forgetful at times, dear." Mrs. Webber
sighed softly and turned to her son. "Hal, dear, it's awfully nice to
see you back again. Would you be kind enough to switch the vic back
on?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Contentedly, Hal complied, and was himself immediately carried away by
the vicarious entertainment, pleased to put the disturbing dream of the
past three months comfortably behind him.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Easy Does It, by E. G. von Wald

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EASY DOES IT ***

***** This file should be named 59255.txt or 59255.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/2/5/59255/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

