The Project Gutenberg EBook of To Pay the Piper, by James Blish

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: To Pay the Piper

Author: James Blish

Release Date: May 2, 2019 [EBook #59415]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO PAY THE PIPER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           TO PAY THE PIPER

                            BY JAMES BLISH

              _Clearly, re-educating Man's brain wouldn't
               fit him for survival on the plague-ridden
            surface. Re-educating his body was the answer;
                 but the process was so very long...._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
             Worlds of If Science Fiction, February 1956.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The man in the white jacket stopped at the door marked "Re-Education
Project--Col. H. H. Mudgett, Commanding Officer" and waited while the
scanner looked him over. He had been through that door a thousand
times, but the scanner made as elaborate a job of it as if it had never
seen him before.

It always did, for there was always in fact a chance that it _had_
never seen him before, whatever the fallible human beings to whom it
reported might think. It went over him from grey, crew-cut poll to
reagent-proof shoes, checking his small wiry body and lean profile
against its stored silhouettes, tasting and smelling him as dubiously
as if he were an orange held in storage two days too long.

"Name?" it said at last.

"Carson, Samuel, 32-454-0698."

"Business?"

"Medical director, Re-Ed One."

While Carson waited, a distant, heavy concussion came rolling down
upon him through the mile of solid granite above his head. At the same
moment, the letters on the door--and everything else inside his cone
of vision--blurred distressingly, and a stab of pure pain went lancing
through his head. It was the supersonic component of the explosion, and
it was harmless--except that it always both hurt and scared him.

The light on the door-scanner, which had been glowing yellow up to
now, flicked back to red again and the machine began the whole routine
all over; the sound-bomb had reset it. Carson patiently endured its
inspection, gave his name, serial number and mission once more, and
this time got the green. He went in, unfolding as he walked the flimsy
square of cheap paper he had been carrying all along.

Mudgett looked up from his desk and said at once: "What now?"

The physician tossed the square of paper down under Mudgett's eyes.
"Summary of the press reaction to Hamelin's speech last night," he
said. "The total effect is going against us, Colonel. Unless we can
change Hamelin's mind, this outcry to re-educate civilians ahead of
soldiers is going to lose the war for us. The urge to live on the
surface again has been mounting for ten years; now it's got a target to
focus on. Us."

Mudgett chewed on a pencil while he read the summary; a blocky, bulky
man, as short as Carson and with hair as grey and close-cropped. A
year ago, Carson would have told him that nobody in Re-Ed could afford
to put stray objects in his mouth even once, let alone as a habit;
now Carson just waited. There wasn't a man--or a woman or a child--of
America's surviving thirty-five million "sane" people who didn't have
some such tic. Not now, not after twenty-five years of underground life.

"He knows it's impossible, doesn't he?" Mudgett demanded abruptly.

"Of course he doesn't," Carson said impatiently. "He doesn't know any
more about the real nature of the project than the people do. He thinks
the 'educating' we do is in some sort of survival technique--That's
what the papers think, too, as you can plainly see by the way they
loaded that editorial."

"Um. If we'd taken direct control of the papers in the first place--"

Carson said nothing. Military control of every facet of civilian life
was a fact, and Mudgett knew it. He also knew that an appearance
of freedom to think is a necessity for the human mind--and that
the appearance could not be maintained without a few shreds of the
actuality.

"Suppose we do this," Mudgett said at last. "Hamelin's position in
the State Department makes it impossible for us to muzzle him. But it
ought to be possible to explain to him that no unprotected human being
can live on the surface, no matter how many Merit Badges he has for
woodcraft and first aid. Maybe we could even take him on a little trip
topside; I'll wager he's never seen it."

"And what if he dies up there?" Carson said stonily. "We lose
three-fifths of every topside party as it is--and Hamelin's an
inexperienced--"

"Might be the best thing, mightn't it?"

"_No_," Carson said. "It would look like we'd planned it that way. The
papers would have the populace boiling by the next morning."

Mudgett groaned and nibbled another double row of indentations around
the barrel of the pencil. "There must be something," he said.

"There is."

"Well?"

"Bring the man here and show him just what we _are_ doing. Re-educate
_him_, if necessary. Once we told the newspapers that he'd taken the
course ... well, who knows, they just might resent it. Abusing his
clearance privileges and so on."

"We'd be violating our basic policy," Mudgett said slowly. "'Give
the Earth back to the men who fight for it.' Still, the idea has some
merits...."

"Hamelin is out in the antechamber right now," Carson said. "Shall I
bring him in?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The radioactivity never did rise much beyond a mildly hazardous level,
and that was only transient, during the second week of the war--the
week called the Death of Cities. The small shards of sanity retained
by the high commands on both sides dictated avoiding weapons with
a built-in backfire: no cobalt bombs were dropped, no territories
permanently poisoned. Generals still remembered that unoccupied
territory, no matter how devastated, is still unconquered territory.

But no such considerations stood in the way of biological warfare. It
was controllable: you never released against the enemy any disease you
didn't yourself know how to control. There would be some slips, of
course, but the margin for error--

There were some slips. But for the most part, biological warfare worked
fine. The great fevers washed like tides around and around the globe,
one after another. In such cities as had escaped the bombings, the
rumble of truck convoys carrying the puffed heaped corpses to the mass
graves became the only sound except for sporadic small-arms fire; and
then that too ceased, and the trucks stood rusting in rows.

Nor were human beings the sole victims. Cattle fevers were sent
out. Wheat rusts, rice molds, corn blights, hog choleras, poultry
enteritises fountained into the indifferent air from the hidden
laboratories, or were loosed far aloft, in the jet-stream, by
rocketing fleets. Gelatin capsules pullulating with gill-rots fell
like hail into the great fishing grounds of Newfoundland, Oregon,
Japan, Sweden, Portugal. Hundreds of species of animals were drafted
as secondary hosts for human diseases, were injected and released to
carry the blessings of the laboratories to their mates and litters.
It was discovered that minute amounts of the tetracycline series of
antibiotics, which had long been used as feed supplements to bring farm
animals to full market weight early, could also be used to raise the
most whopping Anopheles and Aëdes mosquitoes anybody ever saw, capable
of flying long distances against the wind and of carrying a peculiarly
interesting new strains of the malarial parasite and the yellow fever
virus....

By the time it had ended, everyone who remained alive was a mile under
ground.

For good.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I still fail to understand why," Hamelin said, "if, as you claim, you
have methods of re-educating soldiers for surface life, you can't do so
for civilians as well. Or instead."

The under-secretary, a tall, spare man, bald on top, and with a heavily
creased forehead, spoke with the odd neutral accent--untinged by
regionalism--of the trained diplomat, despite the fact that there had
been no such thing as a foreign service for nearly half a century.

"We're going to try to explain that to you," Carson said. "But we
thought that, first of all, we'd try to explain once more why we think
it would be bad policy--as well as physically out of the question.

"Sure, everybody wants to go topside as soon as it's possible. Even
people who are reconciled to these endless caverns and corridors hope
for something better for their children--a glimpse of sunlight, a
little rain, the fall of a leaf. That's more important now to all of us
than the war, which we don't believe in any longer. That doesn't even
make any military sense, since we haven't the numerical strength to
occupy the enemy's territory any more, and they haven't the strength to
occupy ours. We understand all that. But we also know that the enemy is
intent on prosecuting the war to the end. Extermination is what they
say they want, on their propaganda broadcasts, and your own Department
reports that they seem to mean what they say. So we can't give up
fighting them; that would be simple suicide. Are you still with me?"

"Yes, but I don't see--"

"Give me a moment more. If we have to continue to fight, we know
this much: that the first of the two sides to get men on the surface
again--so as to be able to _attack_ important targets, not just keep
them isolated in seas of plagues--will be the side that will bring this
war to an end. They know that, too. We have good reason to believe
that they have a re-education project, and that it's about as far
advanced as ours is."

"Look at it this way," Col. Mudgett burst in unexpectedly. "What we
have now is a stalemate. A saboteur occasionally locates one of the
underground cities and lets the pestilences into it. Sometimes on our
side, sometimes on theirs. But that only happens sporadically, and
it's just more of this mutual extermination business--to which we're
committed, willy-nilly, for as long as they are. If we can get troops
onto the surface first, we'll be able to scout out their important
installations in short order, and issue them a surrender ultimatum with
teeth in it. They'll take it. The only other course is the sort of
slow, mutual suicide we've got now."

Hamelin put the tips of his fingers together. "You gentlemen lecture
me about policy as if I had never heard the word before. I'm familiar
with your arguments for sending soldiers first. You assume that you're
familiar with all of mine for starting with civilians, but you're
wrong, because some of them haven't been brought up at all outside the
Department. I'm going to tell you some of them, and I think they'll
merit your close attention."

Carson shrugged. "I'd like nothing better than to be convinced, Mr.
Secretary. Go ahead."

"You of all people should know, Dr. Carson, how close our underground
society is to a psychotic break. To take a single instance, the number
of juvenile gangs roaming these corridors of ours has increased 400%
since the rumors about the Re-Education Project began to spread.
Or another: the number of individual crimes without motive--crimes
committed, just to distract the committer from the grinding monotony of
the life we all lead--has now passed the total of all other crimes put
together.

"And as for actual insanity--of our thirty-five million people still
unhospitalized, there are four million cases _of which we know_,
each one of which should be committed right now for early paranoid
schizophrenia--except that were we to commit them, our essential
industries would suffer a manpower loss more devastating than anything
the enemy has inflicted upon us. Every one of those four million
persons is a major hazard to his neighbors and to his job, but how
can we do without them? And what can we do about the unrecognized,
sub-clinical cases, which probably total twice as many? How long can we
continue operating without a collapse under such conditions?"

Carson mopped his brow. "I didn't suspect that it had gone that far."

"It has gone that far," Hamelin said icily, "and it is accelerating.
Your own project has helped to accelerate it. Col. Mudgett here
mentioned the opening of isolated cities to the pestilences. Shall I
tell you how Louisville fell?"

"A spy again, I suppose," Mudgett said.

"No, Colonel. Not a spy. A band of--of vigilantes, of mutineers. I'm
familiar with your slogan, 'The Earth to those who fight for it.' Do
you know the counter-slogan that's circulating among the people?"

They waited. Hamelin smiled and said: "'Let's die on the surface.'

"They overwhelmed the military detachment there, put the city
administration to death, and blew open the shaft to the surface. About
a thousand people actually made it to the top. Within twenty-four hours
the city was dead--as the ringleaders had been warned would be the
outcome. The warning didn't deter them. Nor did it protect the prudent
citizens who had no part in the affair."

Hamelin leaned forward suddenly. "People won't wait to be told when
it's their turn to be re-educated. They'll be tired of waiting, tired
to the point of insanity of living at the bottom of a hole. They'll
just go.

"And that, gentlemen, will leave the world to the enemy ... or, more
likely, the rats. They alone are immune to everything by now."

There was a long silence. At last Carson said mildly: "Why aren't _we_
immune to everything by now?"

"Eh? Why--the new generations. They've never been exposed."

"We still have a reservoir of older people who lived through the war:
people who had one or several of the new diseases that swept the
world, some as many as five, and yet recovered. They still have their
immunities; we know; we've tested them. We know from sampling that no
new disease has been introduced by either side in over ten years now.
Against all the known ones, we have immunization techniques, anti-sera,
antibiotics, and so on. I suppose you get your shots every six months
like all the rest of us; we should all be very hard to infect now, and
such infections as do take should run mild courses." Carson held the
under-secretary's eyes grimly. "Now, answer me this question: why is it
that, despite all these protections, _every single person_ in an opened
city dies?"

"I don't know," Hamelin said, staring at each of them in turn. "By your
showing, some of them should recover."

"They should," Carson said. "But nobody does. Why? Because the very
nature of disease has changed since we all went underground. There are
now abroad in the world a number of mutated bacterial strains which can
bypass the immunity mechanisms of the human body altogether. What this
means in simple terms is that, should such a germ get into your body,
your body wouldn't recognize it as an invader. It would manufacture
no antibodies against the germ. Consequently, the germ could multiply
without any check, and--you would die. So would we all."

"I see," Hamelin said. He seemed to have recovered his composure
extraordinarily rapidly. "I am no scientist, gentlemen, but what you
tell me makes our position sound perfectly hopeless. Yet obviously you
have some answer."

Carson nodded. "We do. But it's important for you to understand the
situation, otherwise the answer will mean nothing to you. So: is it
perfectly clear to you now, from what we've said so far, that no amount
of re-educating a man's brain, be he soldier _or_ civilian, will allow
him to survive on the surface?"

"Quite clear," Hamelin said, apparently ungrudgingly. Carson's hopes
rose by a fraction of a millimeter. "But if you don't re-educate his
brain, what can you re-educate? His reflexes, perhaps?"

"No," Carson said. "His lymph nodes, and his spleen."

A scornful grin began to appear on Hamelin's thin lips. "You need
better public relations counsel than you've been getting," he said.
"If what you say is true--as of course I assume it is--then the term
're-educate' is not only inappropriate, it's downright misleading.
If you had chosen a less suggestive and more accurate label in the
beginning, I wouldn't have been able to cause you half the trouble I
have."

"I agree that we were badly advised there," Carson said. "But not
entirely for those reasons. Of course the name is misleading; that's
both a characteristic and a function of the names of top secret
projects. But in this instance, the name 'Re-Education', bad as it now
appears, subjected the men who chose it to a fatal temptation. You see,
though it is misleading, it is also entirely accurate."

"Word-games," Hamelin said.

"Not at all," Mudgett interposed. "We were going to spare you the
theoretical reasoning behind our project, Mr. Secretary, but now
you'll just have to sit still for it. The fact is that the body's
ability to distinguish between its own cells and those of some foreign
tissue--a skin graft, say, or a bacterial invasion of the blood--isn't
an inherited ability. It's a learned reaction. Furthermore, if you'll
think about it a moment, you'll see that it has to be. Body cells die,
too, and have to be disposed of; what would happen if removing those
dead cells provoked an antibody reaction, as the destruction of foreign
cells does? We'd die of anaphylactic shock while we were still infants.

"For that reason, the body has to learn how to scavenge selectively.
In human beings, that lesson isn't learned completely until about a
month after birth. During the intervening time, the newborn infant is
protected by antibodies that it gets from the colestrum, the 'first
milk' it gets from the breast during the three or four days immediately
after birth. It can't generate its own; it isn't allowed to, so to
speak, until it's learned the trick of cleaning up body residues
_without_ triggering the antibody mechanisms. Any dead cells marked
'personal' have to be dealt with some other way."

"That seems clear enough," Hamelin said. "But I don't see its
relevance."

"Well, we're in a position now where that differentiation between the
self and everything outside the body doesn't do us any good any more.
These mutated bacteria have been 'selfed' by the mutation. In other
words, some of their protein molecules, probably desoxyribonucleic acid
molecules, carry configurations or 'recognition-units' identical with
those of our body cells, so that the body can't tell one from another."

"But what has all this to do with re-education?"

"Just this," Carson said. "What we do here is to impose upon the cells
of the body--all of them--a new set of recognition-units for the
guidance of the lymph nodes and the spleen, which are the organs that
produce antibodies. The new units are highly complex, and the chances
of their being duplicated by bacterial evolution, even under forced
draught, are too small to worry about. That's what Re-Education is. In
a few moments, if you like, we'll show you just how it's done."

Hamelin ground out his fifth cigarette in Mudgett's ashtray and placed
the tips of his fingers together thoughtfully. Carson wondered just
how much of the concept of recognition-marking the under-secretary had
absorbed. It had to be admitted that he was astonishingly quick to
take hold of abstract ideas, but the self-marker theory of immunity
was--like everything else in immunology--almost impossible to explain
to laymen, no matter how intelligent.

"This process," Hamelin said hesitantly. "It takes a long time?"

"About six hours per subject, and we can handle only one man at a time.
That means that we can count on putting no more than seven thousand
troops into the field by the turn of the century. Every one will have
to be a highly trained specialist, if we're to bring the war to a quick
conclusion."

"Which means no civilians," Hamelin said. "I see. I'm not entirely
convinced, but--by all means let's see how it's done."

       *       *       *       *       *

Once inside, the under-secretary tried his best to look everywhere at
once. The room cut into the rock was roughly two hundred feet high.
Most of it was occupied by the bulk of the Re-Education Monitor, a
mechanism as tall as a fifteen-storey building, and about a city block
square. Guards watched it on all sides, and the face of the machine
swarmed with technicians.

"Incredible," Hamelin murmured. "That enormous object can process only
one man at a time?"

"That's right," Mudgett said. "Luckily it doesn't have to treat all the
body cells directly. It works through the blood, re-selfing the cells
by means of small changes in the serum chemistry."

"What kind of changes?"

"Well," Carson said, choosing each word carefully, "that's more or
less a graveyard secret, Mr. Secretary. We can tell you this much: the
machine uses a vast array of crystalline, complex sugars which _behave_
rather like the blood group-and-type proteins. They're fed into the
serum in minute amounts, under feedback control of second-by-second
analysis of the blood. The computations involved in deciding upon the
amount and the precise nature of each introduced chemical are highly
complex. Hence the size of the machine. It is, in its major effect, an
artificial kidney."

"I've seen artificial kidneys in the hospitals," Hamelin said,
frowning. "They're rather compact affairs."

"Because all they do is remove waste products from the patient's
blood, and restore the fluid and electrolyte balance. Those are very
minor renal functions in the higher mammals. The organ's main duty is
chemical control of immunity. If Burnet and Fenner had known that back
in 1949, when the selfing theory was being formulated, we'd have had
Re-Education long before now."

"Most of the machine's size is due to the computation section," Mudgett
emphasized. "In the body, the brain-stem does those computations, as
part of maintaining homeostasis. But we can't reach the brain-stem from
outside; it's not under conscious control. Once the body is re-selfed,
it will re-train the thalamus where we can't." Suddenly, two swinging
doors at the base of the machine were pushed apart and a mobile
operating table came through, guided by two attendants. There was a
form on it, covered to the chin with a sheet. The face above the sheet
was immobile and almost as white.

Hamelin watched the table go out of the huge cavern with visibly mixed
emotions. He said: "This process--it's painful?"

"No, not exactly," Carson said. The motive behind the question
interested him hugely, but he didn't dare show it. "But any fooling
around with the immunity mechanisms can give rise to symptoms--fever,
general malaise, and so on. We try to protect our subjects by giving
them a light shock anesthesia first."

"Shock?" Hamelin repeated. "You mean electroshock? I don't see how--"

"Call it stress anesthesia instead. We give the man a steroid drug that
counterfeits the anesthesia the body itself produces in moments of
great stress--on the battlefield, say, or just after a serious injury.
It's fast, and free of after-effects. There's no secret about that,
by the way; the drug involved is 21-hydroxypregnane-3,20 dione sodium
succinate, and it dates all the way back to 1955."

"Oh," the under-secretary said. The ringing sound of the chemical name
had had, as Carson had hoped, a ritually soothing effect.

"Gentlemen," Hamelin said hesitantly. "Gentlemen, I have a--a rather
unusual request. And, I am afraid, a rather selfish one." A brief,
nervous laugh. "Selfish in both senses, if you will pardon me the pun.
You need feel no hesitation in refusing me, but...."

Abruptly he appeared to find it impossible to go on. Carson mentally
crossed his fingers and plunged in.

"You would like to undergo the process yourself?" he said.

"Well, yes. Yes, that's exactly it. Does that seem inconsistent? I
should know, should I not, what it is that I'm advocating for my
following? Know it intimately, from personal experience, not just
theory? Of course I realize that it would conflict with your policy,
but I assure you I wouldn't turn it to any political advantage--none
whatsoever. And perhaps it wouldn't be too great a lapse of policy to
process just one civilian among your seven thousand soldiers."

Subverted, by God! Carson looked at Mudgett with a firmly straight
face. It wouldn't do to accept too quickly.

But Hamelin was rushing on, almost chattering now. "I can understand
your hesitation. You must feel that I'm trying to gain some advantage,
or even to get to the surface ahead of my fellow-men. If it will set
your minds at rest, I would be glad to enlist in your advance army.
Before five years are up, I could surely learn some technical skill
which would make me useful to the expedition. If you would prepare
papers to that effect, I'd be happy to sign them."

"That's hardly necessary," Mudgett said. "After you're Re-Educated, we
can simply announce the fact, and say that you've agreed to join the
advance party when the time comes."

"Ah," Hamelin said. "I see the difficulty. No, that would make my
position quite impossible. If there is no other way--"

"Excuse us a moment," Carson said. Hamelin bowed, and the doctor pulled
Mudgett off out of ear-shot.

"Don't overplay it," he murmured. "You're tipping our hand with that
talk about a press release, Colonel. He's offering us a bribe--but he's
plenty smart enough to see that the price you're suggesting is that of
his whole political career. He won't pay that much."

"What then?" Mudgett whispered hoarsely.

"Get somebody to prepare the kind of informal contract he suggested.
Offer to put it under security seal so we won't be able to show it
to the press at all. He'll know well enough that such a seal can be
broken if our policy ever comes before a presidential review--and that
will restrain him from forcing such a review. Let's not demand too
much. Once he's been re-educated, he'll have to live the rest of the
five years with the knowledge that he _can_ live topside any time he
wants to try it--and he hasn't had the discipline our men have had.
It's my bet that he'll goof off before the five years are up--and good
riddance."

They went back to Hamelin, who was watching the machine and humming in
a painfully abstracted manner.

"I've convinced the Colonel," Carson said, "that your services in the
army might well be very valuable when the time comes, Mr. Secretary. If
you'll sign up, we'll put the papers under security seal for your own
protection, and then I think we can fit you into our treatment program
today."

"I'm grateful to you, Dr. Carson," Hamelin said. "Very grateful,
indeed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Five minutes after his injection, Hamelin was as peaceful as a flounder
and was rolled through the swinging doors. An hour's discussion of the
probable outcome, carried on in the privacy of Mudgett's office, bore
very little additional fruit, however.

"It's our only course," Carson said. "It's what we hoped to gain from
his visit, duly modified by circumstances. It all comes down to this:
Hamelin's compromised himself, and he knows it."

"But," Mudgett said, "suppose he was right? What about all that talk of
his about mass insanity?"

"I'm sure it's true," Carson said, his voice trembling slightly despite
his best efforts at control. "It's going to be rougher than ever down
here for the next five years, Colonel. Our only consolation is that the
enemy must have exactly the same problem; and if we can beat them to
the surface--"

"_Hsst!_" Mudgett said. Carson had already broken off his sentence. He
wondered why the scanner gave a man such a hard time outside that door,
and then admitted him without any warning to the people on the other
side. Couldn't the damned thing be trained to knock?

The newcomer was a page from the haemotology section. "Here's the
preliminary rundown on your 'Student X', Dr. Carson," he said.

The page saluted Mudgett and went out. Carson began to read. After a
moment, he also began to sweat.

"Colonel, look at this. I was wrong after all. Disastrously wrong. I
haven't seen a blood-type distribution pattern like Hamelin's since I
was a medical student, and even back then it was only a demonstration,
not a real live patient. Look at it from the genetic point of view--the
migration factors."

He passed the protocol across the desk. Mudgett was not by background
a scientist, but he was an enormously able administrator, of the breed
that makes it its business to know the technicalities on which any
project ultimately rests. He was not much more than half-way through
the tally before his eyebrows were gaining altitude like shock-waves.

"Carson, we can't let that man into the machine! He's--"

"He's already in it, Colonel, you know that. And if we interrupt the
process before it runs to term, we'll kill him."

"Let's kill him, then," Mudgett said harshly. "Say he died while being
processed. Do the country a favor."

"That would produce a hell of a stink. Besides, we have no proof."

Mudgett flourished the protocol excitedly.

"That's not proof to anyone but a haemotologist."

"But Carson, the man's a saboteur!" Mudgett shouted. "Nobody but an
Asiatic could have a typing pattern like this! And he's no melting-pot
product, either--he's a classical mixture, very probably a Georgian.
And every move he's made since we first heard of him has been aimed
directly at us--aimed directly at tricking us into getting him into the
machine!"

"I think so too," Carson said grimly. "I just hope the enemy hasn't
many more agents as brilliant."

"One's enough," Mudgett said. "He's sure to be loaded to the last cc of
his blood with catalyst poisons. Once the machine starts processing
his serum, we're done for--it'll take us years to re-program the
computer, if it can be done at all. It's _got_ to be stopped!"

"Stopped?" Carson said, astonished. "But it's already stopped. That's
not what worries me. The machine stopped it fifty minutes ago."

"It can't have! How could it? It has no relevant data!"

"Sure it has." Carson leaned forward, took the cruelly chewed pencil
away from Mudgett, and made a neat check beside one of the entries on
the protocol. Mudgett stared at the checked item.

"Platelets Rh VI?" he mumbled. "But what's that got to do with.... Oh.
Oh, I see. That platelet type doesn't exist at all in our population
now, does it? Never seen it before myself, at least."

"No," Carson said, grinning wolfishly. "It never was common in the
West, and the pogrom of 1981 wiped it out. That's something the enemy
couldn't know. But the machine knows it. As soon as it gives him the
standard anti-IV desensitization shot, his platelets will begin to
dissolve--and he'll be rejected for incipient thrombocytopenia." He
laughed. "For his own protection! But--"

"But he's getting nitrous oxide in the machine, and he'll be held six
hours under anesthesia anyhow--also for his own protection," Mudgett
broke in. He was grinning back at Carson like an idiot. "When he comes
out from under, he'll assume that he's been re-educated, and he'll beat
it back to the enemy to report that he's poisoned our machine, so
that they can be sure they'll beat us to the surface. And he'll go the
fastest way: _overland_."

"He will," Carson agreed. "Of course he'll go overland, and of course
he'll die. But where does that leave us? We won't be able to conceal
that he was treated here, if there's any sort of an inquiry at all. And
his death will make everything we do here look like a fraud. Instead
of paying our Pied Piper--and great jumping Jehosophat, look at his
name! They were rubbing our noses in it all the time! Nevertheless, we
didn't pay the piper; we killed him. And 'platelets Rh VI' won't be an
adequate excuse for the press, or for Hamelin's following."

"It doesn't worry me," Mudgett rumbled. "Who'll know? He won't die in
our labs. He'll leave here hale and hearty. He won't die until he makes
a break for the surface. After that we can compose a fine obituary
for the press. Heroic government official, on the highest policy
level--couldn't wait to lead his followers to the surface--died of
being too much in a hurry--Re-Ed Project sorrowfully reminds everyone
that no technique is fool-proof--"

Mudgett paused long enough to light a cigarette, which was a most
singular action for a man who never smoked. "As a matter of fact,
Carson," he said, "it's a natural."

Carson considered it. It seemed to hold up. And 'Hamelin' would have a
death certificate as complex as he deserved--not officially, of course,
but in the minds of everyone who knew the facts. His death, when it
came, would be due directly to the thrombocytopenia which had caused
the Re-Ed machine to reject him--and thrombocytopenia is a disease of
infants. _Unless ye become as little children...._

That was a fitting reason for rejection from the new kingdom of Earth:
anemia of the newborn.

His pent breath went out of him in a long sigh. He hadn't been aware
that he'd been holding it. "It's true," he said softly. "That's the
time to pay the piper."

"When?" Mudgett said.

"When?" Carson said, surprised. "Why, _before_ he takes the children
away."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of To Pay the Piper, by James Blish

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO PAY THE PIPER ***

***** This file should be named 59415-8.txt or 59415-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/4/1/59415/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
